
--- PAGE 1 ---
Article
A distributional code for value in dopamine-
based reinforcement learning
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1924-6 Will Dabney1,5*, Zeb Kurth-Nelson1,2,5, Naoshige Uchida3, Clara Kwon Starkweather3,
Demis Hassabis1, Rémi Munos1 & Matthew Botvinick1,4,5
Received: 3 January 2019
Accepted: 19 November 2019
Since its introduction, the reward prediction error theory of dopamine has explained
Published online: xx xx xxxx
a wealth of empirical phenomena, providing a unifying framework for understanding
the representation of reward and value in the brain1–3. According to the now canonical
theory, reward predictions are represented as a single scalar quantity, which supports
learning about the expectation, or mean, of stochastic outcomes. Here we propose an
account of dopamine-based reinforcement learning inspired by recent artificial
intelligence research on distributional reinforcement learning4–6. We hypothesized
that the brain represents possible future rewards not as a single mean, but instead as a
probability distribution, effectively representing multiple future outcomes
simultaneously and in parallel. This idea implies a set of empirical predictions, which
we tested using single-unit recordings from mouse ventral tegmental area. Our
findings provide strong evidence for a neural realization of distributional
reinforcement learning.
The reward prediction error (RPE) theory of dopamine derives from representation learning (see Extended Data Figs. 2, 3 and Supplemen-
work in the artificial intelligence (AI) field of reinforcement learning tary Information). This prompts the question of whether RL in the brain
(RL)7. Since the link to neuroscience was first made, however, RL has might leverage the benefits of distributional coding. This question is
made substantial advances8,9, revealing factors that greatly enhance encouraged both by the fact that the brain utilizes distributional codes in
the effectiveness of RL algorithms10. In some cases, the relevant mecha- numerous other domains16, and by the fact that the mechanism of distri-
nisms invite comparison with neural function, suggesting hypotheses butional RL is biologically plausible6,17. Here we tested several predictions
concerning reward-based learning in the brain11–13. Here we examine a of distributional RL using single-unit recordings in the ventral tegmental
promising recent development in AI research and investigate its poten- area (VTA) of mice performing tasks with probabilistic rewards.
tial neural correlates. Specifically, we consider a computational frame-
work referred to as distributional reinforcement learning4–6 (Fig. 1a, b).
Value predictions vary among dopamine neurons
Similar to the traditional form of temporal-difference RL—on which
the dopamine theory was based—distributional RL assumes that In contrast to classical temporal-difference (TD) learning, distributional
reward-based learning is driven by a RPE, which signals the difference RL posits a diverse set of RPE channels, each of which carries a different
between received and anticipated reward. (For simplicity, we introduce value prediction, with varying degrees of optimism across channels.
the theory in terms of a single-step transition model, but the same (Value is formally defined in RL as the mean of future outcomes, but here
principles hold for the general multi-step (discounted return) case; we relax this definition to include predictions about future outcomes
see Supplementary Information.) The key difference in distributional that are not necessarily the mean.) These value predictions in turn pro-
RL lies in how ‘anticipated reward’ is defined. In traditional RL, the vide the reference points for different RPE signals, causing the latter to
reward prediction is represented as a single quantity: the average over also differ in terms of optimism. As a surprising consequence, a single
all potential reward outcomes, weighted by their respective probabili- reward outcome can simultaneously elicit positive RPEs (within relatively
ties. By contrast, distributional RL uses a multiplicity of predictions. pessimistic channels) and negative RPEs (within more optimistic ones).
These predictions vary in their degree of optimism about upcoming This translates immediately into a neuroscientific prediction, which
reward. More optimistic predictions anticipate obtaining greater is that dopamine neurons should display such diversity in ‘optimism’.
future rewards; less optimistic predictions anticipate more meager Suppose an agent has learned that a cue predicts a reward whose mag-
outcomes. Together, the entire range of predictions captures the full nitude will be drawn from a probability distribution. In the standard
probability distribution over future rewards (more details in Supple- RL theory, receiving a reward with magnitude below the mean of this
mentary Information). distribution will elicit a negative RPE, whereas larger magnitudes
Compared with traditional RL procedures, distributional RL can will elicit positive RPEs. The reversal point—the magnitude at which
increase performance in deep learning systems by a factor of two prediction errors transition from negative to positive—in standard
or more5,14,15, an effect that stems in part from an enhancement of RL is the expectation of the magnitude’s distribution. By contrast, in
1DeepMind, London, UK. 2Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, University College London, London, UK. 3Center for Brain Science, Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 4Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, UK. 5These authors contributed
equally: Will Dabney, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Matthew Botvinick. *e-mail: wdabney@google.com
Nature | www.nature.com | 1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Article
a Classical TD learning b Distributional TD learning
V V
(cid:71) (cid:71)
Same scaling Mean-value baseline Mean-value coding Different scaling Multiple value baselines Distribution coding
Fig. 4
Reward magnitude
distributional RL, the reversal point differs across dopamine neurons preferences, the 50% cue response should be midway between the 10%
according to their degree of optimism. and 90% cues. Under different risk preferences, the 50% cue response
We tested for such reversal-point diversity in optogenetically verified might be at a different position between 10% and 90%, but it should
dopaminergic VTA neurons, focusing on responses to receipt of liquid be the same for all neurons). Distributional RL predicts, instead, that
rewards, the volume of which was drawn at random on each trial from dopamine neurons should vary in their responses to the 50% cue: some
seven possible values (Fig. 1c). As anticipated by distributional RL, but not neurons should respond optimistically, emitting a RPE nearly as large as
by the standard theory, we found that dopamine neurons had substan- to the 90% cue. Others should respond pessimistically, emitting a RPE
tially different reversal points, ranging from cells that reversed between closer to the 10% cue response (Fig. 3a). Labelling these two cases as
the smallest two rewards to cells that reversed between the largest two optimistically and pessimistically biased, respectively, distributional RL
rewards (Fig. 2a, b). This diversity was not owing to noise, as the reversal predicts that as a population, dopamine neurons should show concur-
point estimated on a random half of the data was a robust predictor rent optimistic and pessimistic coding for reward probability.
of the reversal point estimated on the other half of the data (R = 0.58, To test this prediction, we analysed responses of dopaminergic VTA
P = 1.8 × 10−5 by linear regression; Fig. 2c). In fact, in response to the 5 μl neurons in the cued probability task just described (see Methods for more
reward, 13 out of 40 cells had significantly above-baseline responses and details). As predicted by distributional RL, but not by the standard theory,
10 out of 40 cells had significantly below-baseline responses. Note that dopamine neurons differed in their patterns of response across the three
while some cells appeared pessimistic and others appeared optimistic, reward-probability cues, with both optimistic and pessimistic probability
there was also a population of cells with approximately neutral responses, coding observed (Fig. 3b left, Extended Data Figs. 6, 7). Again, this diver-
as predicted by the distributional RL model (compare with Fig. 2a, right). sity was not due to noise, as 10 out of 31 cells were significantly optimistic
A stronger test of our theory is whether this diversity also exists and 9 out of 31 cells were significantly pessimistic, at a P < 0.05 threshold
within a single animal. Most animals had too few cells for analysis, but (see Methods). By comparison, at a 0.05 threshold, approximately 3 out
within the single animal with the highest number of recorded cells, of 31 cells in a non-distributional TD system are expected by chance to
reversal points estimated on half of the data were robustly predictive appear either significantly optimistic or pessimistic. At the group level,
of reversal points estimated on the other half (P = 0.008). Furthermore, the null hypothesis of no diversity was rejected by one-way analysis of
in response to a single reward magnitude (5 μl), 6 out of 16 cells had variance (ANOVA) (F(30, 3335) = 4.31, P = 6 × 10−14). Notably, both forms
significantly above-baseline responses and 5 out of 16 cells had sig- of probability coding were observed side by side in individual animals.
nificantly below-baseline responses. Finally, Fig. 2d shows rasters of In the animal with the largest number of recorded cells, 4 out of 17 cells
two example cells from this animal, exhibiting consistently opposite were consistently optimistic and 5 out of 17 cells were consistently pessi-
responses to the same reward. mistic. This was also significant by ANOVA (F(15, 1652) = 4.02, P = 3 × 10−7).
Because the diversity we observe is reliable across trials, it cannot Because most cells were recorded in different sessions, it was
be explained by adding measurement noise to non-distributional TD important to examine whether global changes in reward expecta-
models. As detailed in section 2 of the Supplementary Information (see tions between sessions might explain the observed diversity in opti-
also Extended Data Fig. 4), we also analysed several more elaborate mism. To this end, we analysed patterns of anticipatory licking. Here
alternative models, and whereas some of these can give rise to the we found that, although within-session fluctuations in licking were
appearance of reversal-point diversity under some analysis methods, predictive of within-session fluctuations in dopamine cell firing, there
the same models are contradicted by other aspects of the experimental was no relationship between optimism and licking on a cell-by-cell
data, which we report below. basis (Extended Data Fig. 9). This observation makes it unlikely that
Our first prediction dealt with the relationship between dopaminergic the diverse responses we observed in dopamine neurons are explained
signalling and reward magnitude; dopaminergic RPE signals also scale by session-to-session variability in global reward expectation. That
with reward probability2,18, and distributional RL also leads to a predic- interpretation is further undermined by the fact that reversal-point
tion in this domain. Pursuing this, we analysed data from a second task diversity was observed in the one case where several cells were recorded
in which sensory cues indicated the probability of an upcoming liquid simultaneously in one animal (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Information).
reward (Fig. 1d). One cue indicated a 10% probability of reward, a differ-
ent cue indicated a 50% probability, and a third a 90% probability. The
GABAergic neurons make diverse reward predictions
standard RPE theory predicts that, considering responses at the time the
cue is presented, all dopamine neurons should have the same relative In distributional RL, diversity in RPE signalling arises because differ-
spacing between 10%, 50% and 90% cue responses. (Under neutral risk ent RPE channels listen to different reward predictions, which vary
2 | Nature | www.nature.com
gniriF
RPE
gniriF
eulav
denraeL
Fig. 4
Reward magnitude
gniriF
RPE
gniriF
eulav
denraeL
c Variable magnitude
0.1 μl
0.3 μl
1.2 μl
2.5 μl
5 μl
10 μl
20 μl
Variable probability
d
p
1 – p
α+/(α+ + α–) α+/(α+ + α–) ∅
Fig. 1 | Distributional value coding arises from a diversity of relative scaling (α+) and negative (α−) RPEs. Red shading indicates α+ > α−, and blue shading
of positive and negative prediction errors. a, In the standard temporal- indicates α− > α+. An imbalance between α+ and α− causes each channel to learn a
difference (TD) theory of the dopamine system, all value predictors learn the different value prediction. This set of value predictions collectively represents
same value V. Each dopamine cell is assumed to have the same relative scaling the distribution over possible rewards. c, We analyse data from two tasks. In the
for positive and negative RPEs (left). This causes each value prediction (or value variable-magnitude task, there is a single cue, followed by a reward of
baseline) to be the mean of the outcome distribution (middle). Dotted lines unpredictable magnitude. d, In the variable-probability task, there are three
indicate zero RPE or pre-stimulus firing. b, In our proposed model, cues, which each signal a different probability of reward, and the reward
distributional TD, different channels have different relative scaling for positive magnitude is fixed.

--- PAGE 3 ---
a Classical TD Distributional TD b Neural data c Consistency d Example cells
Mice
0.3 0.2
0.1
0
log(p)–20 0
in their degree of optimism. From a neuroscientific perspective, it
Distribution coding from asymmetric RPE scaling
should thus be possible to track the effects we have identified at the
level of VTA dopamine neurons back to upstream neurons signal- The results reported in the preceding sections suggest that a distri-
ling reward predictions. Previous work strongly suggests that VTA bution of value predictions is coded in the neural circuits underlying
GABAergic (γ-aminobutyric acid) neurons have precisely this role, RL. How might such coding arise in the first place? Recent AI work on
and that the reward prediction used to compute the RPE is reflected distributional RL15 has shown that distributional coding arises automati-
in their firing rates19. Therefore, we predicted that, in the same task cally if a single change is made to the classical TD learning mechanism.
described above, the population of VTA GABAergic neurons should In classical TD, positive and negative errors are given equal weight.
also contain concurrent optimistic and pessimistic probability cod- As a result, positive and negative errors are in equilibrium when the
ing. As predicted, consistent differences in probability coding were learned prediction equals the mean of the reward distribution. There-
observed across putative GABAergic neurons, again with concurrent fore, classical TD learns to predict the average over future rewards.
optimism and pessimism (Fig. 3b, right). In the animal with the largest By contrast, in distributional TD, different RPE channels place different
number of cells recorded, 12 out of 36 cells were consistently opti- relative weights on positive versus negative RPEs (see Fig. 1b). In channels
mistic and 11 out of 36 cells were consistently pessimistic (example that overweight positive RPEs, reaching equilibrium requires these positive
cells shown in Fig. 3d). errors to become less frequent, so the learning dynamics converge on a
Nature | www.nature.com | 3
Fraction
20 μl
10 μl
5 μl
2.5 μl
0.1 μl
0.1 μ 2 l .5 μl 5 μl 10 μl
Reversal point in half of data
atad
fo
flah
rehto
ni
tniop
lasreveR
50
25
40
20
0
slairT
–1 0 1 2 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 –200 200 400 600
RPE (normalized) RPE (normalized) Δ Firing rate (normalized) Time from reward onset (ms)
)tniop
lasrever
yb
detros(
tinU
)tniop
lasrever
yb
detros(
tinU
)tniop
lasrever
yb
detros(
lleC
0
Fig. 2 | Different dopamine neurons consistently reverse from positive to responded positively to only the very largest reward. b, Responses recorded
negative responses at different reward magnitudes. Variable-magnitude from light-identified dopamine neurons in behaving mice. Neurons differed
task from ref. 30. On each trial, the animal experiences one of seven possible markedly in their reversal points. c, To assess whether this diversity was
reward magnitudes (0.1, 0.3, 1.2, 2.5, 5, 10 or 20 μl), selected randomly. a, RPEs reliable, we randomly partitioned the data into two halves and estimated
produced by classical and distributional TD simulations. Each horizontal bar is reversal points independently in each half. We found that the reversal point
one simulated neuron. Each dot colour corresponds to a particular reward estimated in one half was correlated with that estimated in the other half
magnitude. The x axis is the cell’s response (change in firing rate) when reward (P = 1.8 × 10−5 by linear regression). d, Spike rasters for two example dopamine
is delivered. Cells are sorted by reversal point. In classical TD, all cells carried neurons from the same animal, showing responses to all trials when the 5 μl
approximately the same RPE signal. Note that the slight differences between reward was delivered. We analysed data from 200 to 600 ms after reward onset
cells arose from Gaussian noise added to the simulation; the differences (highlighted), to exclude the initial transient that was positive for all
between cells in the classical TD simulation were not statistically reliable. magnitudes. During this epoch, the cell on the bottom fires above its baseline
Conversely, in distributional TD, cells had reliably different degrees of rate, while the cell on the top pauses.
optimism. Some responded positively to almost all rewards, and others
Classical TD Distributional TD
DA response GABAergic response
)zH(
etar gniriF
Δ
10% cue 50% cue 90% cue
5 3
4 3 2
2
1 1 0 0 –1
–2 –1 –3
–4 –2
–0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Time from odour onset (s) Time from odour onset (s)
)zH( etar
gniriF
Δ
DA time courses GABAergic time courses
8 12 6 10 4 8 6
2
4 0 2 –2 0
–4 –2
Time from odour onset (s) Time from odour onset (s) Time from odour onset (s)
)zH( etar
gniriF
Δ
50 40 30 20
10
0 –10 –20
–30
25
20
15
10 5
0
–5
Time from odour onset (s)
)zH(
etar
gniriF
Δ
a c d
–10 –5 0 5 10 –10 –5 0 5 10
t-statistic t-statistic
b
–10 –5 0 5 10 –10 –5 0 5 10
t-statistic t-statistic
ycneuqerf
evitaleR
ycneuqerf
evitaleR
ycneuqerf
evitaleR
ycneuqerf
evitaleR
1 1 0.8 Neutral 0.8 Pessimistic Optimistic 0.6 0.6
0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2
0 0
–0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5
1 1
0.8 0.8
0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4
0.2 0.2
0 0
–0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Fig. 3 | Optimistic and pessimistic probability coding occur concurrently in from real dopamine and putative GABAergic neurons. The pattern of results
dopamine and VTA GABAergic neurons. Data from variable-probability task. closely matches the predictions from the distributional TD model.
a, Histogram (across simulated cells) of t-statistics which compare each cell’s c, Responses of four example dopamine neurons recorded simultaneously in a
50% cue response against the mean 50% cue response across cells. Qualitatively single animal. Each trace is the average response to one of the three cues.
identical results hold when comparing the 50% cue response against Shaded area shows s.e.m. Time zero is the onset of the odour cue. Some cells
the midpoint of 10% and 90% responses. The superimposed black curve shows code the 50% cue similarly to the 90% cue, while others simultaneously code it
the t-distribution with the corresponding degrees of freedom. Distributional similarly to the 10% cue. Grey areas show epoch averaged for summary
TD predicts simultaneous optimistic and pessimistic coding of probability, analyses. d, Responses of two example VTA GABAergic cells from the same
whereas classical TD predicts that all cells have the same coding. Colour animal.
indicates the degree of optimism or pessimism. b, Same as a, but using data

--- PAGE 4 ---
Article
15 15 15
10 10 10 5 5 5 0 0 0 –5 –5 –5
–5 0 5 10 –5 0 5 10 –5 0 5 10
Reward minus reversal point
more optimistic reward prediction. Conversely, in channels overweighting particular response asymmetries in the corresponding neurons, should
negative RPEs, a more pessimistic prediction is needed to attain equilibrium encode an approximate representation of the anticipated probability
(Fig. 4a, Extended Data Fig. 1a). Together, the set of predictions learned distribution over future rewards.
across all channels encodes the full shape of the reward distribution. If this is the case, then with sufficient data it should be possible to
When distributional RL is considered as a model of the dopamine sys- decode the full value distribution from the responses of dopamine neu-
tem, these points translate into two testable predictions. First, dopamine rons. As a final test of the distributional RL hypothesis, we attempted
neurons should differ in their relative scaling of positive and negative this type of decoding. The distributional TD model implies that, if
RPEs. To test this prediction, we analysed activity from VTA dopamine dopaminergic responses are approximately linear in the positive and
neurons in the variable-magnitude task described above. We first esti- negative domains, then the resultant learned reward predictions will
mated a reversal point for each cell as previously described. Then, for each correspond to expectiles of the reward distribution20 (expectiles are
cell, we separately estimated two slopes: α+ for responses in the positive a statistic of distributions, which generalize the mean in the same way
domain (that is, above the reversal point), and α− for the negative domain that quantiles generalize the median).
(Fig. 4b). This revealed reproducible differences across dopamine neurons We therefore treated the reversal points and response asymmetries
in the relative magnitude of positive versus negative RPEs (Extended measured in the variable-magnitude task as defining a set of expec-
Data Fig. 5). Across all animals, the mean value of the ratio α+/(α+ + α−) tiles, and we transformed these expectiles into a probability density
was 0.48. However, many cells had a value significantly above or below (see Methods). As shown in Fig. 5a–c, the resulting density captured
this mean (Fig. 4c; see Methods for details of statistical test). At the group multiple modes of the ground-truth value distribution. Decoding the
level, there was significant diversity between cells by one-way ANOVA RPEs produced by a distributional TD simulation, but not a classical
(F(38, 234) = 2.93, P = 4 × 10−7). In the animal with the largest number of TD simulation, produced the same pattern of results.
recorded cells, 3 out of 15 cells were significantly below the mean and 3 Parallel analyses focusing on the variable-probability task (see Meth-
out of 15 were significantly above the mean; ANOVA again rejected the ods) yielded similarly good matches to the ground-truth distributions
null hypothesis of no diversity between cells (F(14, 90) = 4.06, P = 2 × 10−5). in that task (Fig. 5d, e). In both tasks, successful decoding depended
Second, RPE asymmetry should correlate, across dopamine neu- on the specific pattern of variability in the neural data, and not on the
rons, with reversal point. Dopamine neurons that scale positive RPEs presence of variability per se (Extended Data Fig. 8).
more steeply relative to negative RPEs should be linked with relatively It is worth emphasizing that none of the effects we have reported are
optimistic reward predictions, and so should have reversal points at anticipated by the standard RPE theory of dopamine, which implies that
relatively high reward magnitudes. Dopamine neurons that scale posi- all dopamine neurons should transmit essentially the same RPE signal.
tive RPEs less steeply should have relatively low reversal points. Again Why have the present effects not been observed before? In some cases,
using data from the variable-magnitude task, we found a strong cor- relevant data have been hiding in plain sight. For example, a number of
relation between RPE asymmetry and reversal point (P = 8.1 × 10−5 by studies have reported marked variability in the relative magnitude of
linear regression; Fig. 4d, e), validating this prediction. Furthermore, positive and negative RPEs across dopamine neurons; however, they
this effect survived when only considering data from the single animal have treated this as an incidental finding or a reflection of measure-
with the largest number of recorded cells (P = 0.002). ment error, or viewed it as a problem for the RPE theory17. One of the
earliest studies of reward-probability coding in dopaminergic RPEs
remarked on apparent diversity across dopamine neurons, but only in a
Decoding reward distributions footnote18. A more general issue is that the forms of variability we have
As we have discussed, the distributional TD model correctly predicts reported are masked by traditional analysis techniques, which typically
that dopamine neurons should show diverse reversal points and focus on average responses across dopamine neurons (see Supplemen-
response asymmetries, and that these should correlate. Finally, we tary Information and Extended Data Fig. 10).
consider the most detailed prediction of the model. The specific rever- Distributional RL offers a range of untested predictions. Dopamine
sal points observed in any experimental situation, together with the neurons should maintain their ordering of relative optimism across task
4 | Nature | www.nature.com
etar
gniriF Δ
Reward minus reversal point
etar
gniriF
Δ
Distributional TD simulation
1.2
1
0.8
Asymmetric scaling in DA firing 0.6
0.4
Each cell 0.2 Mean across cells 0
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Cell index
)–α++α(/+α
Diversity in asymmetry 40 Normalized by negative scale
30
20
10
0
–10 Different from mean –20
0 5 –10 –5 0 5 10 15
Reward minus reversal point
)dezilamron(
etar
gniriF
Δ
Asymmetry predicts reversal point
10 μl
5 μl
2.5 μl 1.2 μl 0.1 μl
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
α+/(α++α–)
tniop
lasreveR
a c d e
b
Fig. 4 | Relative scaling of positive and negative dopamine responses α+/(α+ + α−) are displayed, where α+ and α− are the slopes estimated above.
predicts reversal point. a, Three simulated dopamine neurons—each with a d, Relative scaling of positive and negative responses predicts that cell’s
different asymmetry—in the variable-magnitude task. For each unit, we reversal point (P = 8.1 × 10−5 by linear regression). Each point represents one
empirically estimated the reversal point where responses switch from negative dopamine cell. Dashed line is the mean over cells. Light grey traces show
to positive. The x axis shows reward minus the per-cell reversal point, reversal points measured in distributional TD simulations of the same task, and
effectively aligning each cell’s responses to its respective reversal point. show variability over simulation runs. e, All 40 dopamine cells plotted in the
Baseline-subtracted response to reward is plotted on the y axis. Responses same fashion as in b, except normalized by the slope estimated in the negative
below the reversal point are shown in green and those above are shown in domain. Thus, the observed variability in slope in the positive domain
orange. Solid curves show linear functions fit separately to the above-reversal corresponds to diversity in relative scaling of positive and negative responses.
and below-reversal domains of each cell. b, Same as a, but showing three real Cells are coloured by reversal point, to illustrate the relationship between
example dopamine cells. c, The diversity in relative scaling of positive and reversal point and asymmetric scaling. In all panels, reward magnitudes are in
negative responses in dopamine cells is statistically reliable (one-way ANOVA; estimated utility space (see Methods).
F(38, 234) = 2.93, P = 4 × 10−7). The mean and 95% confidence intervals of

--- PAGE 5 ---
e
Sensitivity to distribution
10% cue 50% cue
90% cue
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Probability of reward
contexts, even as the specific distribution of rewards changes. If RPE 5. Bellemare, M. G., Dabney, W., & Munos, R. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (eds Precup, D. & The, Y. W.)
channels with particular levels of optimism are selectively activated
449–458 (2017).
with optogenetics, this should sculpt the learned distribution, which 6. Dabney, W. Rowland, M. Bellemare, M. G. & Munos, R. Distributional reinforcement
should in turn be detectable with behavioural measures of sensitivity learning with quantile regression. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2018).
7. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: an Introduction Vol. 1 (MIT Press,
to moments of the distribution. We list further predictions in the Sup-
1998).
plementary Information. 8. Mnih, V. et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518,
Distributional RL also gives rise to a number of broader questions. 529–533 (2015).
9. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.
What are the circuit- or cellular-level mechanisms that give rise to a
Nature 529, 484–489 (2016).
diversity of asymmetry in positive versus negative RPE scaling? It is 10. Hessel, M. et al. Rainbow: combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In
also worth considering whether other mechanisms, aside from asym- 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2018).
11. Botvinick, M. M., Niv, Y. & Barto, A. G. Hierarchically organized behavior and its neural
metric scaling of RPEs, might contribute to distributional coding. It is foundations: a reinforcement learning perspective. Cognition 113, 262–280 (2009).
well established, for example, that positive and negative RPEs differ- 12. Wang, J. X. et al. Prefrontal cortex as a meta-reinforcement learning system. Nat.
entially engage striatal D and D dopamine receptors21, and that the Neurosci. 21, 860–868 (2018).
1 2 13. Song, H. F., Yang, G. R. & Wang, X. J. Reward-based training of recurrent neural networks
balance of these receptors varies anatomically22–24. This suggests a sec- for cognitive and value-based tasks. eLife 6, e21492 (2017).
ond potential mechanism for differential learning from positive versus 14. Barth-Maron, G. et al. Distributed distributional deterministic policy gradients. In
negative RPEs25. Moreover, how do different RPE channels anatomically International Conference on Learning Representations https://openreview.net/
forum?id=SyZipzbCb (2018).
couple with their corresponding reward predictions (see Extended 15. Dabney, W., Ostrovski, G., Silver, D. & Munos, R. Implicit quantile networks for
Data Fig. 4i–k)? Finally, what effects might distributional coding have distributional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning
downstream, at the level of action learning and selection? With this (2018).
16. Pouget, A., Beck, J. M., Ma, W. J. & Latham, P. E. Probabilistic brains: knowns and
question in mind, it is notable that some current theories in behavioural unknowns. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1170–1178 (2013).
economics centre on risk measures that can be easily read out from 17. Lammel, S., Lim, B. K. & Malenka, R. C. Reward and aversion in a heterogeneous midbrain
dopamine system. Neuropharmacology 76, 351–359 (2014).
the kind of distributional codes that the present work has considered.
18. Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P. N. & Schultz, W. Discrete coding of reward probability and
Finally, we speculate on the implications of the distributional hypothesis uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science 299, 1898–1902 (2003).
of dopamine for the mechanisms of mental disorders such as addiction and 19. Eshel, N. et al. Arithmetic and local circuitry underlying dopamine prediction errors.
depression. Mood has been linked with predictions of future reward26, and Nature 525, 243–246 (2015).
20. Rowland, M., et al. Statistics and samples in distributional reinforcement learning. In
it has been proposed that both depression and bipolar disorder may involve International Conference on Machine Learning (2019).
biased forecasts concerning value-laden outcomes27. It has recently been 21. Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C. & O’Reilly, R. C. By carrot or by stick: cognitive reinforcement
proposed that such biases may arise from asymmetries in RPE coding28,29. learning in parkinsonism. Science 306, 1940–1943 (2004).
22. Hirvonen, J. et al. Striatal dopamine D1 and D2 receptor balance in twins at increased
There are clear potential connections between these ideas and the phenom- genetic risk for schizophrenia. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 146, 13–20 (2006).
ena we have reported here, presenting opportunities for further research. 23. Piggott, M. A. et al. Dopaminergic activities in the human striatum: rostrocaudal gradients
of uptake sites and of D1 and D2 but not of D3 receptor binding or dopamine.
Neuroscience 90, 433–445 (1999).
24. Rosa-Neto, P., Doudet, D. J. & Cumming, P. Gradients of dopamine D1- and D2/3-binding
Online content sites in the basal ganglia of pig and monkey measured by PET. Neuroimage 22, 1076–1083
(2004).
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum-
25. Mikhael, J. G. & Bogacz, R. Learning reward uncertainty in the basal ganglia. PLOS
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, Comput. Biol. 12, e1005062 (2016).
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author con- 26. Robb, B. et al. A computational and neural model of momentary subjective well-being.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12252–12257 (2014).
tributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code
27. Huys, Q. J., Daw, N. D. & Dayan, P. Depression: a decision-theoretic analysis. Annu. Rev.
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1924-6. Neurosci. 38, 1–23 (2015).
28. Bennett, D. & Niv, Y. Opening Burton’s clock: psychiatric insights from computational
cognitive models. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/y2vzu (2018).
1. Schultz, W., Stauffer, W. R. & Lak, A. The phasic dopamine signal maturing: from reward via 29. Tian, J. & Uchida, N. Habenula lesions reveal that multiple mechanisms underlie
behavioural activation to formal economic utility. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 43, 139–148 (2017). dopamine prediction errors. Neuron 87, 1304–1316 (2015).
2. Glimcher, P. W. Understanding dopamine and reinforcement learning: the dopamine 30. Eshel, N., Tian, J., Bukwich, M. & Uchida, N. Dopamine neurons share common response
reward prediction error hypothesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 15647–15654 (2011). function for reward prediction error. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 479–486 (2016).
3. Watabe-Uchida, M., Eshel, N. & Uchida, N. Neural circuitry of reward prediction error.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 40, 373–394 (2017). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
4. Morimura, T., Sugiyama, M., Kashima, H., Hachiya, H. & Tanaka, T. Parametric return published maps and institutional affiliations.
density estimation for reinforcement learning. In Proc. 26th Conference on Uncertainty in
Artificial Intelligence (eds Grunwald, P. & Spirtes, P.) http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=3023549.3023592 (2010). © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Nature | www.nature.com | 5
)gol(
ssoL
d
Decoded distribution (DA)
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Reward (AU)
ytisneD
c
Decoded distribution (DA)
8
6
4
2
0
0.1 μl 2.5 μl5 μl 10 μl 20 μl
ytisneD
a b
Distributional TD decoding Classical TD decoding
0.8 0.3
Ground truth
Decoded 0.6 0.2
0.4
0.1 0.2
0 0
Reward
ytisneD
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
ytisneD
0.1 μl 2.5 μl5 μl 10 μl 20 μl 0.1 μl 2.5 μl5 μl 10 μl 20 μl
Reward Reward
Fig. 5 | Decoding reward distributions from neural responses. positive and negative RPEs, as shown in Fig. 4. Unlike the classical TD
a, Distributional TD simulation trained on the variable-magnitude task, whose simulation, the real dopamine cells collectively encode the shape of the reward
actual (smoothed) distribution of rewards is shown in grey. After training the distribution that animals have been trained to expect. d, Same decoding
model, we interpret the learned values as a set of expectiles. We then decode analysis, using data from each of the cue conditions in the variable-probability
the set of expectiles into a probability density (blue traces). Multiple solutions task, based on cue responses of dopamine neurons (decoding for GABAergic
are shown in light blue, and the average across solutions is shown in dark blue. neurons shown in Extended Data Fig. 8i, j). e, The neural data for both
(See Methods for more details.) b, Same as a, but with a classical TD simulation. dopamine and GABAergic neurons were best fit by Bernoulli distributions
c, Same as a, but using data from recorded dopamine cells. The expectiles are closely approximating the ground-truth reward probabilities in all three cue
defined by the reversal points and the relative scaling from the slopes of conditions.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Article
Methods with other response functions (for example, Hill function30 or κ−satu-
rating), despite these leading to semantically different estimators of
Distributional RL model the distribution. The population sizes were chosen for clarity of pres-
The model for distributional RL we use throughout the work is based entation and to provide similar variability as observed in the neuronal
on the principle of asymmetric regression and extends recent results data. Each cell was paired with a different state-dependent value esti-
in AI5,6,15. We present a more detailed and accessible introduction to mate V(x). Note that while these simulations focused on immediate
i
distributional RL in the Supplementary Information. Here we outline rewards, the same algorithm also learns distributions over multi-step
the method in brief. returns.
Let f: ℝ → ℝ be a response function. In each observed state x, let there In the variable-probability task, each cue corresponded to a differ-
be a set of value predictions V(x) which are updated with learning rates ent value estimate and reward probability (90%, 50% or 10%). When
i
α+,α−∈R+. Then given a state x, next-state x′, resulting reward signal r rewarded, the agent received numerical reward of 1.0, and when omit-
i i
and time discount γ ∈ [0, 1), the distributional TD model computes ted, it received 0.0. Both agents were trained for 100 trials of 5,000
distributional TD errors updates, and both simulated n = 31 cells (separate value estimates). The
learning rates were all selected uniformly at random between [0.001,
δ i =r+γV j (x′)−V i (x) (1) 0.2]. Cue response was taken to be the temporal difference from a con-
stant zero baseline to the value estimate.
where V(x′) is a sample from the distribution V(x′). The model then In the variable-magnitude task, all rewards were taken to be the water
j
updates the baselines with magnitude measured in microlitres (qualitatively same results obtained
with utilities instead of magnitudes). For Fig. 2 we ran 10 trials of 25,000
V i (x)←V i (x)+α i +f(δ i ) for δ i >0 (2) updates each for 150 estimators with random learning rates in [0.001,
0.02]. These smaller learning rates and larger number of updates were
V(x)←V(x)+α−f(δ)forδ≤0 (3) intended to ensure the values converged fully with low error. We then
i i i i i
report temporal difference errors for ten cells taken uniformly to span
When performed with a tabular representation, asymmetry uni- the range of value estimates for each agent. Reported errors (simulating
formly distributed, and f(δ) = sgn(δ), this method converges to the τ i change in firing rate) are the utility of a reward minus the value estimate
quantile, τ=
α+
i , of the distribution over discounted returns at x and scaled by the learning rate. As with the neuronal data, these are
(ref. 6). Sim i ilar α l i + y + , a α− i symmetric regression with response function f(δ) = δ reported averaged over trials and normalized by variance over reward
corresponds to expectile regression31. Like quantiles, expectiles fully magnitudes. Distributional TD RPEs are computed using asymmetric
characterize the distribution and have been shown to be particularly learning rates, with a small constant (floor) added to the learning rates.
useful for measures of risk32,33.
Finally, we note that throughout the paper, we use the terms opti- Distribution decoding
mistic and pessimistic to refer to return predictions that are above or For both real neural data and TD simulations, we performed distribution
below the mean (expected) return. Importantly, these predictions are decoding. The distributional and classical TD simulations used for
optimistic in the sense of corresponding to particularly good outcomes decoding in the variable-magnitude task each used 40 value predictors,
from the set of possible outcomes. They are not optimistic in the sense to match the 40 recorded cells in the neural data (neural analyses were
of corresponding to outcomes that are impossibly good. pooled across the six animals). In the distributional TD simulation, each
value predictor used a different asymmetric scaling factor τ=
α+
i ,
Artificial agent results and therefore learned a different value prediction V. i αi ++α− i
i
Atari results are on the Atari-57 benchmark using the publicly avail- The decoding analyses began with a set of reversal points, V, and
i
able Arcade Learning Environment34. This is a set of 57 Atari 2600 asymmetric scaling factors τ. For the neural data, these were obtained
i
games and human-performance baselines. Refer to previous work as described elsewhere. For the simulations, they were read directly
for details on deep Q-networks (DQN) and computation of human- from the simulation. These numbers were interpreted as a set of expec-
normalized scores8. The distributional TD agent uses our proposed tiles, with the τ-th expectile having value V. We decoded these into
i i
model and a DQN with multiple (n = 200) value predictors, each with probability densities by solving an optimization problem to find the
a different asymmetry, spaced uniformly in [0, 1]. The training objec- density most compatible with the set of expectiles20. For optimization,
tive of DQN, the Huber loss, is replaced with the asymmetric quantile- the density was parameterized as a set of samples. For display in Fig. 5,
Huber loss, which corresponds to the κ-saturating response function the samples are smoothed with kernel density estimation.
f(δ) = max(min(δ, κ), −κ), with κ = 1.
Finally, at each update we train all channels based on the immediate Animals and behavioural tasks
reward and the predicted future returns from all next-state value predic- The rodent data we re-analysed here were first reported in ref. 19. Meth-
tors. Further details can be found in ref. 6. The physics-based motor- ods details can be found in that paper and in ref. 30. We give a brief
control task requires control of a 28 degrees-of-freedom humanoid description of the methods below.
to complete a 3D obstacle course in minimal time35. Full details for the Five mice were trained on a ‘variable-probability’ task, and six differ-
D3PG and distributional D3PG agents are as described14. Distributions ent mice on a ‘variable-magnitude’ task. In the variable-probability task,
over return shown in Extended Data Fig. 2d, f are based on the network- in each trial the animal first experienced one of four odour cues for 1 s,
predicted distribution in each of the given frames. followed by a 1-s pause, followed by a reward (3.75 μl water), an aversive
airpuff or nothing. Odour 1 signalled a 90% chance of reward, odour
Tabular simulations 2 signalled a 50% chance of reward, odour 3 signalled a 10% chance of
Tabular simulations of the classical TD and distributional TD models reward and odour 4 signalled a 90% chance of airpuff. Odour meanings
used a population of learning rates selected uniformly at random, were randomized across animals. Inter-trial intervals were exponentially
α+~U(0,1) for each cell i. In all cases the only algorithmic difference distributed.
i
between the classical and distributional TD models was that the dis- An infrared beam was positioned in front of the water delivery spout,
tributional model used a separately varying learning rate for negative and each beam break was recorded as one lick event. We report the aver-
prediction errors, α−~U(0,1) for each cell i. Both methods used a linear age lick rate over the entire interval between the cue and the outcome
i
response function. Qualitatively similar results were also obtained (that is, 0–2,000 ms after cue onset).

--- PAGE 7 ---
In the variable-magnitude task, in 10% of trials an odour cue was The per-cell cue responses shown in Extended Data Fig. 7 were nor-
delivered that indicated that no reward would be delivered on that malized to zero mean and unit variance, to allow direct comparison of
trial. In the remaining 90% of trials, one of the following reward mag- cells with different response variability. Each cell appears in one of three
nitudes was delivered, at random: 0.1, 0.3, 1.2, 2.5, 5, 10 or 20 μl. In half panels based on the outcome of two single-tailed Mann–Whitney tests
of these trials, this reward was preceded by 1,500 ms by an odour cue evaluating the rank order for c < c and c < c (see Supplementary
10 50 50 90
(which indicated that a reward was forthcoming but did not disclose Information section 3.3 for further details). The left, centre and right
its magnitude). In the other half, it was unsignalled. panels correspond to outcomes (P ≥ 0.05, P < 0.05), (P < 0.05, P < 0.05
In order to identify dopamine neurons while recording, neurons or P ≥ 0.05, P ≥ 0.05) and (P < 0.05, P ≥ 0.05), respectively.
in the VTA were tagged with channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) by injecting
adeno-associated virus (AAV) that expresses ChR2 in a Cre-dependent Variable-magnitude task. n = 40 cells were recorded from five ani-
manner into the VTA of transgenic mice that express Cre recombinase mals, with the following number of cells per animal: 3, 6, 9, 16 and 6.
under the promoter of the dopamine transporter (DAT) gene Slc6a3 Responses to reward were defined as the average activity from 200 to
(B6.SJL-Slc6a3tm1.1(cre)Bkmn/J, The Jackson Laboratory)36. Mice were 600 ms after reward onset. This time interval was selected to match
implanted with a head plate and custom-built microdrive containing ref. 30 as closely as possible, while excluding the initial response to the
6–8 tetrodes (Sandvik) and optical fibre, as described37. feeder click30,38,39, which was not selective to reward magnitude and was
All experiments were performed in accordance with the US National positive for all reward magnitudes. This enabled us to find the reward
Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals magnitudes for which the dopamine response was either boosted or
and approved by the Harvard Institutional Animal Care and Use Com- suppressed relative to baseline.
mittee. The reversal point (that is, the reward magnitude that would elicit
neither a positive nor a negative deflection in firing relative to baseline)
Neuronal data and analysis for each cell was defined as the magnitude M that maximized the num-
R
Extracellular recordings were made from VTA using a data acquisi- ber of positive responses to rewards greater than M plus the number
R
tion system (DigiLynx, Neuralynx). VTA recording sites were verified of negative responses to rewards less than M . To obtain statistics for
R
histologically. The identity of dopaminergic cells was confirmed by reliability of cell-to-cell differences in reversal point, we partitioned
recording the electrophysiological responses of cells to a brief blue the data into random halves and estimated the reversal point for each
light pulse train, which stimulates only DAT-expressing cells. Spikes cell separately in each half. We repeated this procedure 1,000 times
were sorted using SpikeSort3D (Neuralynx) or MClust-3.5 (A.D. Redish). with different random partitions, and we report the mean R value and
Putative GABAergic neurons in the VTA were identified by clustering geometric mean p value across these 1,000 folds.
of firing patterns as described previously30,37. All confidence intervals After measuring reversal points, we fit linear functions separately to
are s.e.m. unless otherwise noted. the positive and negative domains of each cell. To obtain confidence
Data analyses were performed using NumPy 1.15 and MATLAB R2018a intervals, we divided the data into seven random partitions (seven being
(Mathworks). Spike times were collected in 1-ms bins to create peri- the smallest number of trials in any condition for any cell), subject to
stimulus time histograms. These histograms were then smoothed by the constraint that every condition for every cell contain at least one
convolving with the function (1−e−t)⋅e−t/T, where T was a time constant, trial in each partition. In each partition, we repeated the procedure
set to 20 ms as in ref. 30. For single-cell traces, we set T to 200 ms for for estimating reversal points and finding slopes in the positive and
display purposes. negative domains. Our confidence interval on τ = α+/(α+ + α−) was then
After smoothing, the data were baseline-corrected by subtracting the s.e.m. of the values calculated across the seven partitions. ANOVAs
from each trial and each neuron independently the mean over that trial’s are also reported testing the null hypothesis that means (across parti-
activity from −1,000 to 0 ms relative to stimulus onset (or relative to tions) were not different between cells.
reward onset in the unexpected reward condition). Fitting linear functions to dopamine responses was more logical in
utility space than in reward volume space. We relied on ref. 38 to approxi-
Variable-probability task. n = 31 cells were recorded from five ani- mate the underlying utility function from the dopamine responses
mals, with the following number of cells per animal: 1, 4, 16, 1 and 9. to rewards of varying magnitudes. We used these empirical utilities
Responses to cue for dopamine neurons were defined as the average instead of raw reward magnitudes for the analyses shown in Fig. 4.
activity from 0 to 400 ms after cue onset. This interval was chosen to However, none of the reported results were sensitive to this choice of
match ref. 30. Responses to cue for putative GABAergic neurons were utility function. We also ran the analyses using other utility functions,
defined as the average activity from 0 to 1,500 ms after cue onset. This and these results are reported in Extended Data Fig. 5. One cell was
longer interval was chosen because these neurons had much slower excluded from analyses in Fig. 5: because it had no positive responses
responses, often ramping up slowly over the first 500 or 1,000 ms after to any reward magnitude, a slope could not be fit in the positive domain.
cue onset37 (Fig. 3d). When measuring the correlation (across cells) between reversal
We were interested in whether there was between-cell diversity point and τ, we first randomly split the data into two disjoint halves of
in responses to the 50% cue. We first normalized the responses trials. In one half, we first calculated reversal points RP and used these
1
to the 50% cue on a per-cell basis as follows: cnorm=(c −mean(c ))/ reversal points to calculate α+ and α−. In the other half, we calculated
50 50 10
(mean(c )−mean(c )), where mean indicates the mean over trials reversal points RP. The correlation we report is between RP and τ = α+/
90 10 2 2
within a cell. In order to be agnostic about the risk preferences of the (α+ + α−). We did this to avoid confounds associated with using the same
animal, we then performed a two-tailed t-test of the cell’s normalized data to estimate both slopes and intercepts.
responses to the 50% cue against the average of all cells’ normalized
responses to the 50% cue. This is the test for optimistic or pessimistic Reporting summary
probability coding that we report in the main text. Note that these Further information on research design is available in the Nature
t-statistics would be t-distributed if the differences between cells were Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
due to chance. We also report ANOVA results where we evaluate the null
hypothesis that all cells’ normalized 50% responses have the same mean.
Data availability
The same pattern of results held when instead comparing responses
to the 50% cue against the midway point between responses to the 10% The neuronal data analysed in this work are available at https://doi.
cue and responses to the 90% cue. org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UX5RG.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Article
40. Schaul, T., Quan, J., Antonoglou, I. & Silver, D. Prioritized experience replay. In
Code availability International Conference on Learning Representations (2016).
41. Van Hasselt, H., Guez, A. & Silver, D. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning.
The analysis code from our value-distribution decoding and code used In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (2016).
to generate model predictions for distributional TD are available at 42. Krizhevsky, A. & Hinton, G. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images (Univ. of
Toronto, 2009).
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UX5RG.
Acknowledgements We thank K. Miller, P. Dayan, T. Stepleton, J. Paton, M. Frank, C. Clopath,
31. Newey, W. K. & Powell, J. L. Asymmetric least squares estimation and testing.
T. Behrens and the members of the Uchida laboratory for comments on the manuscript; and
Econometrica 55, 819–847 (1987).
N. Eshel, J. Tian, M. Bukwich and M. Watabe-Uchida for providing data.
32. Chris Jones, M. Expectiles and m-quantiles are quantiles. Stat. Probab. Lett. 20, 149–153
(1994).
33. Ziegel, J. F. Coherence and elicitability. Math. Finance 26, 901–918 (2016). Author contributions W.D. conceived the project. W.D., Z.K.-N. and M.B. contributed ideas for
34. Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J. & Bowling, M. The arcade learning environment: experiments and analysis. W.D. and Z.K.-N. performed simulation experiments and analysis.
an evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 47, 253–279 (2013). N.U. and C.K.S. provided neuronal data for analysis. W.D., Z.K.-N. and M.B. managed the
35. Heess, N. et al. Emergence of locomotion behaviours in rich environments. Preprint at project. M.B., N.U., R.M. and D.H. advised on the project. M.B., W.D. and Z.K.-N. wrote the paper.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.02286 (2017). W.D., Z.K.-N., M.B., N.U., C.K.S., D.H. and R.M. provided revisions to the paper.
36. Bäckman, C. M., et al. Characterization of a mouse strain expressing cre recombinase
from the 3′ untranslated region of the dopamine transporter locus. Genesis 44, 383–390 Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
(2006).
37. Cohen, J. Y. et al. Neuron-type-specific signals for reward and punishment in the ventral Additional information
tegmental area. Nature 482, 85–88 (2012). Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-
38. Stauffer, W. R., Lak, A. & Schultz, W. Dopamine reward prediction error responses reflect 1924-6.
marginal utility. Curr. Biol. 24, 2491–2500 (2014). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to W.D.
39. Fiorillo, C. D., Song, M. R. & Yun, S. R. Multiphasic temporal dynamics in responses of Peer review information Nature thanks Rui Costa, Michael Littman and the other, anonymous,
midbrain dopamine neurons to appetitive and aversive stimuli. J. Neurosci. 33, 4710–4725 reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
(2013). Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Mechanism of distributional TD. a, The degree of Quantile (sign function) version is displayed here for clarity. Model is trained
asymmetry in positive to negative scale determines the equilibrium where on arbitrary task with trimodal reward distribution. c, Same as b, viewed in
positive and negative errors balance. Equal scaling equilibrates at the mean, terms of cumulative distribution (left) or learned value for each predictor
whereas a larger positive (negative) scaling produces an equilibrium above (quantile function) (right).
(below) the mean. b, Distributional prediction emerges through experience.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | Learning the distribution of returns improves Reward predictions of individual RPE channels shown as tick marks ranging
performance of deep RL agents across multiple domains. a, DQN and from pessimistic (blue) to optimistic (red), and kernel density estimate shown
distributional TD share identical nonlinear network structures. b, c, After in black. e, Atari-57 experiments with single runs of prioritized experience
training classical or distributional DQN on MsPacman, we freeze the agent and replay40 and double DQN41 agents for reference. Benefits of distributional
then train a separate linear decoder to reconstruct frames from the agent’s learning exceed other popular innovations. f, g, The performance pay-off of
final layer representation. For each agent, reconstructions are shown. The distributional RL can be seen across a wide diversity of tasks. Here we give
distributional model’s representation allows substantially better another example, a humanoid motor-control task in the MuJoCo physics
reconstruction. d, At a single frame of MsPacman (not shown), the agent’s value simulator. Prioritized experience replay agent is shown for reference14. Traces
predictions together represent a probability distribution over future rewards. show individual runs; averages are in bold.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Simulation experiment to examine the role of experiment. e, Bird–dog t-SNE visualization of final hidden layer of network,
representation learning in distributional RL. a, Illustration of tasks 1 and 2. given different input images (blue, bird; red, dog). Left, classical TD; right,
b, Example images for each class used in our experiment42 c, Experimental distributional TD; top row, representation after training on task 1; bottom row,
results, where each of ten random seeds yields an individual run shown with representation after training on task 2.
traces; average over seeds is shown in bold. d, Same as c, but for control

--- PAGE 12 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Null models. a, Classical TD plus noise does not give rise reversal point (opposite that observed in neural data). i, Diagram illustrating a
to the pattern of results observed in real dopamine data in the variable- Gaussian-weighted topological mapping between RPEs and value predictors.
magnitude task. When reversal points were estimated in two independent j, Varying the standard deviation of this Gaussian modulates the degree of
partitions there was no correlation between the two (P = 0.32 by linear coupling. k, In a task with equal chance of a reward 1.0 or 0.0, distributional TD
regression). b, We then estimated asymmetric scaling of responses and found with different levels of coupling shows robustness to the degree of coupling.
no correlation between this and reversal point (P = 0.78 by linear regression). l, When there is no coupling, a distributional code is not learned, but
c, Model comparison between ‘same’, a single reversal point, and ‘diverse’, asymmetric scaling can cause spurious detection of diverse reversal points.
separate reversal points. In both, the model is used to predict whether a held- m, Even though every cell has the same reward prediction they appear to have
out trial has a positive or negative response. d, Simulated baseline-subtracted different reversal points. n, With this model, some cells may have significantly
RPEs, colour-coded according to the ground-truth value of bias added to that positive responses, and others significantly negative responses, in response to
cell’s RPEs. e, Across all simulated cells, there was a strong positive relationship the same reward. o, But this model is unable to explain a positive correlation
between pre-stimulus baseline firing and the estimated reversal point. f, Two between asymmetric scaling and reversal points. p, Simulation of ‘synaptic’
independent measurements of the reversal point were strongly correlated. distributional RL, in which learning rates but not firing rates are
g, The proportion of simulated cells that have significantly positive (blue) or asymmetrically scaled. This model predicts diversity in reversal points
negative (red) responses showed no magnitudes with both positive and between dopamine neurons. q, The model predicts no correlation between
negative responses. h, In the simulation, there was a significant negative asymmetric scaling of firing rates and reversal point.
relationship between the estimated asymmetry of each cell and its estimated

--- PAGE 14 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Asymmetry and reversal. a, Left, all data points (trials) asymmetric scaling and reversal point. We repeat this procedure 20 times with
from an example cell. The solid lines are linear fits to the positive and negative different dopamine response functions in the simulation, and different
domains, and the shaded areas show 95% confidence intervals calculated with functions used to fit the positive and negative domains of the simulated data.
Bayesian regression. Right, the same cell plotted in the format of Fig. 4b. The functions are sorted in increasing order of concavity. An artefact can
b, Cross-validated model comparison on the dopamine data favours allowing emerge if the response function used to fit the data is less concave than the
each cell to have its own asymmetric scaling (P = 1.4 × 10−11 by paired t-test). The response function used to generate the data. For example, when generating
standard error of the mean appears large relative to the P value because the data with a Hill function but fitting with a linear function, a positive correlation
P value is computed using a paired test. c, Although the difference between can be spuriously measured. e, When simulating data from the distributional
single-asymmetry and diverse-asymmetry models was small in firing-rate TD model, where a true correlation exists between asymmetric scaling and
space, such small differences correspond to large differences in decoded reversal point, it is always possible to detect this positive correlation, even if
distribution space (more details in Supplementary Information). Each point is a the fitting response function is more concave than the generating response
TD simulation; colour indicates the degree of diversity in asymmetric scaling function. The black rectangle highlights the function used to fit real neural
within that simulation. d, We were interested in whether an apparent data in c. f, Here we analyse the real dopamine cell data identically to Fig. 4d,
correlation between reversal point and asymmetry could arise as an artefact, but using Hill functions instead of linear functions to fit the positive and
owing to a mismatch between the shape of the actual dopamine response negative domains. Because the correlation between asymmetric scaling and
function and the function used to fit it. Here we simulate the variable- reversal point still appears under these adversarial conditions, we can be
magnitude task using a TD model without a true correlation between confident it is not driven by this artefact. g, Same as Fig. 4d, but using linear
asymmetric scaling and reversal point. We then apply the same analysis response function and linear utility function (instead of empirical utility).
pipeline as in the main paper, to measure the correlation (colour axis) between

--- PAGE 15 ---
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Cue responses versus outcome responses, and more baseline-subtracted response to airpuff. Dots with black outlines are per-cell
evidence for diversity. a, In the variable-probability task: firing at cue, versus means, and un-outlined dots are means of disjoint subsets of trials indicating
firing at reward (left) or omission (right). Colour brightness denotes consistency of asymmetry. Right, the same data plotted in a different way, with
asymmetry. b, Same as a, but showing RPEs from distributional TD simulation. cells sorted along the x axis by response to airpuff. Response to reward is shown
c, Data from ref. 30 also included unpredicted rewards and unpredicted in greyscale dots. Asterisks indicate significant difference in firing rates from
airpuffs. Top two panels show responses for all the cells recorded in one animal one or both neighbouring cells. d, Simulations for distributional but not
and bottom two panels show responses for all the cells of another animal. Left, classical TD produce diversity in relative response.
the x axis is the baseline-subtracted response to free reward and the y axis is the

--- PAGE 16 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | More details of data in variable-probability task. are split into panels according to a statistical test for type of probability coding
a, Details of analysis method. Of the four possible outcomes of the two Mann– (see Methods for details). Colour indicates the degree of optimism or
Whitney tests (Methods), two outcomes correspond to interpolation (middle) pessimism. Distributional TD predicts simultaneous optimistic and
and one each to the pessimistic (left) and optimistic (right) groups. pessimistic coding of probability, whereas classical TD predicts all cells have
b, Simulation results for the classical TD and distributional TD models. y axis the same coding. c, Same as b, but using data from real dopamine neurons. The
shows the average firing-rate change, normalized to mean zero and unit pattern of results closely matches the predictions from the distributional TD
variance, in response to each of the three cues. Each curve is one cell. The cells model. d, Same as b, using data from putative VTA GABAergic interneurons.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Further distribution decoding analysis. This figure functions used to shift asymmetries, to measure degradation of decoded
pertains to the variable-magnitude experiment. a–c, In the decoding shown in distribution. The normal cumulative distribution function ϕ is used to
the main text, we constrained the support of the distribution to the range of the transform asymmetry τ. This is shifted by some value s and transformed back
rewards in the task. Here, we applied the decoding analysis without through the normal quantile function ϕ−1. Positive values s increase the value of
constraining the output values. We find similar results, although with τ and negative values decrease the value of τ. f, Decoded distributions under
increased variance. d, We compare the quality of the decoded distribution different shifts, s. g, Plot of shifted asymmetries for values of s used.
against several controls. The real decoding is shown as black dots. In coloured h, Quantification of match between decoded and ground-truth distribution,
lines are reference distributions (uniform and Gaussian with the same mean for each s. i, j, Same as Fig. 5d, e, but for putative GABAergic cells rather than
and variance as the ground truth; and the ground truth mirrored). Black traces dopamine cells.
shift or scale the ground-truth distribution by varying amounts. e, Nonlinear

--- PAGE 18 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Simultaneous diversity. a, b, Variable-probability task. These are the same four cells whose time courses are shown in Fig. 3c.
Mean spiking (a) and licking (b) activity in response to each of the three cues f, Variable-magnitude task. Across cells, there was no relationship between
(indicating 10%, 50% or 90% probability of reward) at time 0, and in response to asymmetric scaling of positive versus negative prediction errors, and baseline
the outcome (reward or no reward) at time 2,000 ms. c, Trial-to-trial variations firing rates (R = 0.18, P = 0.29). Each point is a cell. These data are from
in lick rates were strongly correlated with trial-to-trial variations in dopamine dopamine neurons at reward delivery time. g, t-statistics of response to 5 μl
firing rates. Mean of each cell is subtracted from each axis, and the x axis is reward compared with baseline firing rate, for all 16 cells from animal D. Some
binned for ease of visualization. d, Dopaminergic coding of the 50% cue relative cells respond significantly above baseline and others significantly below. Cells
to the 10% and 90% cues (as shown in b) was not correlated with the same are sorted by t-statistic. h, Spike rasters showing all trials in which the 5 μl
measure computed on lick rates. Therefore, between-session differences in reward was delivered. The two panels are two example cells from the same
cue preference, measured by anticipatory licking, cannot explain between-cell animal with rasters shown in Fig. 2.
differences in optimism. e, Four simultaneously recorded dopamine neurons.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Relationship of results to original analysis. Here c, Correlation between response predicted by scaled common response
we reproduce results for the variable-magnitude task in ref. 30 with two function and actual response to expected reward delivery. d, Zooming in
different time windows. a, Change in firing rate in response to cued reward on c shows correlation driven primarily by larger reward magnitudes.
delivery averaged over all cells. b, Comparing Hill-function fit and response e–h, Repeating the above analysis for a window of 200–600 ms.
averaged over all cells for expected (cued) and unexpected reward delivery.

--- PAGE 20 ---
1
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Will Dabney, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Matthew
Corresponding author(s): Botvinick
Last updated by author(s): Oct. 31, 2019
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection Simulation experiments were built with custom code and use the following components: Python 2.7 and Tensorflow 1.13.1. Artificial
agent experiments are based upon previously published methods.
Data analysis Data analysis was performed using MATLAB R2018a, NumPy 1.15, and SciPy 1.2.1. Analysis code from our value-distribution decoding
analyses, as well as code used to generate model predictions for distributional TD, are available at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/
UX5RG.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.
We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The neuronal data analyzed in this work have been uploaded to OSF and are available at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UX5RG.

--- PAGE 21 ---
2
nature
research
|
reporting
summary
October
2018
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size All data were taken from a previously-published set of experiments (Eshel et al 2015, 2016).
Data exclusions No data were excluded.
Replication Cross-validation was used to avoid over-fitting.
Randomization There were no between-animal manipulations. Trial sequences were randomized.
Blinding There were no design factors to which blinding would be relevant.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.
Materials & experimental systems Methods
n/a Involved in the study n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies ChIP-seq
Eukaryotic cell lines Flow cytometry
Palaeontology MRI-based neuroimaging
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Animals and other organisms
Policy information about studies involving animals; ARRIVE guidelines recommended for reporting animal research
Laboratory animals The rodent data we re-analyzed here were first reported in Eshel et al. (2015). We used 5 adult male mice, backcrossed for more
than 5 generations with C57/BL6J mice, that were heterozygous for Cre recombinase under the control of either the DAT gene or
the Vgat gene.
Wild animals The study did not involve wild animals.
Field-collected samples The study did not involve field-collected samples.
Ethics oversight All experiments were performed in accordance with the US National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals and approved by the Harvard Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
