
--- PAGE 1 ---
Article
Advancing mathematics by guiding human
intuition with AI
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04086-x Alex Davies1 ✉, Petar Veličković1, Lars Buesing1, Sam Blackwell1, Daniel Zheng1,
Nenad Tomašev1, Richard Tanburn1, Peter Battaglia1, Charles Blundell1, András Juhász2,
Received: 10 July 2021
Marc Lackenby2, Geordie Williamson3, Demis Hassabis1 & Pushmeet Kohli1 ✉
Accepted: 30 September 2021
Published online: 1 December 2021
The practice of mathematics involves discovering patterns and using these to
Open access formulate and prove conjectures, resulting in theorems. Since the 1960s,
Check for updates mathematicians have used computers to assist in the discovery of patterns and
formulation of conjectures1, most famously in the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjecture2, a Millennium Prize Problem3. Here we provide examples of new
fundamental results in pure mathematics that have been discovered with the
assistance of machine learning—demonstrating a method by which machine learning
can aid mathematicians in discovering new conjectures and theorems. We propose a
process of using machine learning to discover potential patterns and relations
between mathematical objects, understanding them with attribution techniques and
using these observations to guide intuition and propose conjectures. We outline this
machine-learning-guided framework and demonstrate its successful application to
current research questions in distinct areas of pure mathematics, in each case
showing how it led to meaningful mathematical contributions on important open
problems: a new connection between the algebraic and geometric structure of knots,
and a candidate algorithm predicted by the combinatorial invariance conjecture for
symmetric groups4. Our work may serve as a model for collaboration between the
fields of mathematics and artificial intelligence (AI) that can achieve surprising results
by leveraging the respective strengths of mathematicians and machine learning.
One of the central drivers of mathematical progress is the discovery that AI can also be used to assist in the discovery of theorems and con-
of patterns and formulation of useful conjectures: statements that jectures at the forefront of mathematical research. This extends work
are suspected to be true but have not been proven to hold in all cases. using supervised learning to find patterns20–24 by focusing on enabling
Mathematicians have always used data to help in this process—from mathematicians to understand the learned functions and derive useful
the early hand-calculated prime tables used by Gauss and others that mathematical insight. We propose a framework for augmenting the
led to the prime number theorem5, to modern computer-generated standard mathematician’s toolkit with powerful pattern recognition
data1,5 in cases such as the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture2. and interpretation methods from machine learning and demonstrate
The introduction of computers to generate data and test conjectures its value and generality by showing how it led us to two fundamental
afforded mathematicians a new understanding of problems that were new discoveries, one in topology and another in representation theory.
previously inaccessible6, but while computational techniques have Our contribution shows how mature machine learning methodologies
become consistently useful in other parts of the mathematical pro- can be adapted and integrated into existing mathematical workflows
cess7,8, artificial intelligence (AI) systems have not yet established a to achieve novel results.
similar place. Prior systems for generating conjectures have either
contributed genuinely useful research conjectures9 via methods that
do not easily generalize to other mathematical areas10, or have dem- Guiding mathematical intuition with AI
onstrated novel, general methods for finding conjectures11 that have A mathematician’s intuition plays an enormously important role in
not yet yielded mathematically valuable results. mathematical discovery—“It is only with a combination of both rigor-
AI, in particular the field of machine learning12–14, offers a collec- ous formalism and good intuition that one can tackle complex math-
tion of techniques that can effectively detect patterns in data and has ematical problems”25. The following framework, illustrated in Fig. 1,
increasingly demonstrated utility in scientific disciplines15. In math- describes a general method by which mathematicians can use tools
ematics, it has been shown that AI can be used as a valuable tool by from machine learning to guide their intuitions concerning complex
finding counterexamples to existing conjectures16, accelerating calcu- mathematical objects, verifying their hypotheses about the existence
lations17, generating symbolic solutions18 and detecting the existence of relationships and helping them understand those relationships. We
of structure in mathematical objects19. In this work, we demonstrate propose that this is a natural and empirically productive way that these
1DeepMind, London, UK. 2University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 3University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. ✉e-mail: adavies@deepmind.com; pushmeet@deepmind.com
70 | Nature | Vol 600 | 2 December 2021
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 2 ---
Hypothesize Generatedata Trainsupervisedmodel Findpatternsviaattribution
∃f: f(X(z)) ≈ Y(z) (X(z), Y(z)) fˆ(X(z)) ≈ Y(z) Interrogate fˆ
z~Pz
Alter sampling Conjecturecandidate f′
distribution
Reformulate hypothesis
Mathematiciansteps Provetheorem
Computationalsteps
Fig. 1 | Flowchart of the framework. The process helps guide a mathematician’s the accuracy of the learned function fˆ and attribution techniques applied to it
intuition about a hypothesized function f, by training a machine learning model to can aid in the understanding of the problem and the construction of a closed-form
estimate that function over a particular distribution of data P. The insights from f′. The process is iterative and interactive, rather than a single series of steps.
Z
well-understood techniques in statistics and machine learning can be they may be related. We have used the above framework to help math-
used as part of a mathematician’s work. ematicians to obtain impactful mathematical results in two cases—dis-
Concretely, it helps guide a mathematician’s intuition about the covering and proving one of the first relationships between algebraic
relationship between two mathematical objects X(z) and Y(z) associ- and geometric invariants in knot theory and conjecturing a resolution
ated with z by identifying a function fˆ such that fˆ(X(z)) ≈ Y(z) and to the combinatorial invariance conjecture for symmetric groups4,
analysing it to allow the mathematician to understand properties of a well-known conjecture in representation theory. In each area, we
the relationship. As an illustrative example: let z be convex polyhedra, demonstrate how the framework has successfully helped guide the
X(z) ∈ Z 2×R 2 be the number of vertices and edges of z, as well as the mathematician to achieve the result. In each of these cases, the neces-
volume and surface area, and Y(z) ∈ ℤ be the number of faces of z. sary models can be trained within several hours on a machine with a
Euler’s formula states that there is an exact relationship between X(z) single graphics processing unit.
and Y(z) in this case: X(z) · (−1, 1, 0, 0) + 2 = Y(z). In this simple example,
among many other ways, the relationship could be rediscovered by
the traditional methods of data-driven conjecture generation1. How- Topology
ever, for X(z) and Y(z) in higher-dimensional spaces, or of more complex Low-dimensional topology is an active and influential area of mathemat-
types, such as graphs, and for more complicated, nonlinear fˆ, this ics. Knots, which are simple closed curves in R 3, are one of the key objects
approach is either less useful or entirely infeasible. that are studied, and some of the subject’s main goals are to classify
The framework helps guide the intuition of mathematicians in two them, to understand their properties and to establish connections with
ways: by verifying the hypothesized existence of structure/patterns in other fields. One of the principal ways that this is carried out is through
mathematical objects through the use of supervised machine learning; invariants, which are algebraic, geometric or numerical quantities that
and by helping in the understanding of these patterns through the use are the same for any two equivalent knots. These invariants are derived
of attribution techniques. in many different ways, but we focus on two of the main categories:
In the supervised learning stage, the mathematician proposes a hyperbolic invariants and algebraic invariants. These two types of
hypothesis that there exists a relationship between X(z) and Y(z). By invariants are derived from quite different mathematical disciplines,
generating a dataset of X(z) and Y(z) pairs, we can use supervised learn- and so it is of considerable interest to establish connections between
ing to train a function fˆ that predicts Y(z), using only X(z) as input. The them. Some examples of these invariants for small knots are shown in
key contributions of machine learning in this regression process are Fig. 2. A notable example of a conjectured connection is the volume
the broad set of possible nonlinear functions that can be learned given conjecture26, which proposes that the hyperbolic volume of a knot (a
a sufficient amount of data. If fˆ is more accurate than would be geometric invariant) should be encoded within the asymptotic behav-
expected by chance, it indicates that there may be such a relationship iour of its coloured Jones polynomials (which are algebraic invariants).
to explore. If so, attribution techniques can help in the understanding Our hypothesis was that there exists an undiscovered relationship
of the learned function fˆ sufficiently for the mathematician to conjec- between the hyperbolic and algebraic invariants of a knot. A supervised
ture a candidate f′. Attribution techniques can be used to understand learning model was able to detect the existence of a pattern between a
which aspects of fˆ are relevant for predictions of Y(z). For example, large set of geometric invariants and the signature σ(K), which is known
many attribution techniques aim to quantify which component of X(z) to encode important information about a knot K, but was not previously
the function fˆ is sensitive to. The attribution technique we use in our known to be related to the hyperbolic geometry. The most relevant
work, gradient saliency, does this by calculating the derivative of out- features identified by the attribution technique, shown in Fig. 3a, were
puts of fˆ, with respect to the inputs. This allows a mathematician to three invariants of the cusp geometry, with the relationship visualized
identify and prioritize aspects of the problem that are most likely to partly in Fig. 3b. Training a second model with X(z) consisting of only
be relevant for the relationship. This iterative process might need to these measurements achieved a very similar accuracy, suggesting that
be repeated several times before a viable conjecture is settled on. In they are a sufficient set of features to capture almost all of the effect of
this process, the mathematician can guide the choice of conjectures the geometry on the signature. These three invariants were the real and
to those that not just fit the data but also seem interesting, plausibly imaginary parts of the meridional translation μ and the longitudinal
true and, ideally, suggestive of a proof strategy. translation λ. There is a nonlinear, multivariate relationship between
Conceptually, this framework provides a ‘test bed for intuition’— these quantities and the signature. Having been guided to focus on
quickly verifying whether an intuition about the relationship between these invariants, we discovered that this relationship is best understood
two quantities may be worth pursuing and, if so, guidance as to how by means of a new quantity, which is linearly related to the signature.
Nature | Vol 600 | 2 December 2021 | 71
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 3 ---
Article
z: Knot X(z): Geometric invariants Y(z): Algebraic invariants
Volume Chern–Simons Meridional translation ... Signature Jones polynomial ...
2.0299 0 i ... 0 t−2 − t−1 + 1 − t + t2 ...
2.8281 –0.1532 0.7381+0.8831i ... –2 t − t2 + 2t3 − t4 + t5 − t6 ...
3.1640 0.1560 –0.7237+1.0160i ... 0 t−2 − t−1 + 2 − 2t + t2 − t3 + t4 ...
Fig. 2 | Examples of invariants for three hyperbolic knots. We hypothesized that there was a previously undiscovered relationship between the geometric and
algebraic invariants.
We introduce the ‘natural slope’, defined to be slope(K) = Re(λ/μ), where result that instead relies on short geodesics, another of the most salient
Re denotes the real part. It has the following geometric interpretation. features, in the Supplementary Information. Further details and a full
One can realize the meridian curve as a geodesic γ on the Euclidean proof of the above theorem are available in ref. 27. Across the datasets
torus. If one fires off a geodesic γ⊥ from this orthogonally, it will even- we generated, we can place a lower bound of c ≥ 0.23392, and it would
tually return and hit γ at some point. In doing so, it will have travelled be reasonable to conjecture that c is at most 0.3, which gives a tight
along a longitude minus some multiple of the meridian. This multiple relationship in the regions in which we have calculated.
is the natural slope. It need not be an integer, because the endpoint of The above theorem is one of the first results that connect the alge-
γ⊥ might not be the same as its starting point. Our initial conjecture braic and geometric invariants of knots and has various interesting
relating natural slope and signature was as follows. applications. It directly implies that the signature controls the
Conjecture: There exist constants c and c such that, for every hyper- non-hyperbolic Dehn surgeries on the knot and that the natural slope
1 2
bolic knot K, controls the genus of surfaces in R+ 4 whose boundary is the knot. We
expect that this newly discovered relationship between natural slope
|2σ(K)−slope(K)|<c 1 vol(K)+c 2 (1) and signature will have many other applications in low-dimensional
topology. It is surprising that a simple yet profound connection such
While this conjecture was supported by an analysis of several large
as this has been overlooked in an area that has been extensively studied.
datasets sampled from different distributions, we were able to con-
struct counterexamples using braids of a specific form. Subsequently,
we were able to establish a relationship between slope(K), signature
Representation theory
σ(K), volume vol(K) and one of the next most salient geometric invari-
ants, the injectivity radius inj(K) (ref. 27). Representation theory is the theory of linear symmetry. The building
blocks of all representations are the irreducible ones, and understand-
Theorem: There exists a constant c such that, for any hyperbolic knot K,
ing them is one of the most important goals of representation theory.
|2σ(K)−slope(K)|≤cvol(K)inj(K)−3 (2) Irreducible representations generalize the fundamental frequencies of
Fourier analysis28. In several important examples, the structure of irreduc-
It turns out that the injectivity radius tends not to get very small, ible representations is governed by Kazhdan–Lusztig (KL) polynomials,
even for knots of large volume. Hence, the term inj(K)−3 tends not to get which have deep connections to combinatorics, algebraic geometry and
very large in practice. However, it would clearly be desirable to have a singularity theory. KL polynomials are polynomials attached to pairs of
theorem that avoided the dependence on inj(K)−3, and we give such a elements in symmetric groups (or more generally, pairs of elements in
a b
Im(Meridional translation)
200
30
175
Im(Short geodesic) 20
150
Injectivity radius
10 125
Cusp volume
0 100
–10 75
Re(Short geodesic)
Volume –20 50
25
–30
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 –1 0 1
Normalized attribution score
72 | Nature | Vol 600 | 2 December 2021
stnairavni
cirtemoeG
:)z(X
erutangiS
Longitudinal translation
Re(Meridional translation)
Symmetry group
Torsion degree
Chern–Simons
Adjoint torsion degree
0.8 1.0
Meridional translation (real)
Fig. 3 | Knot theory attribution. a, Attribution values for each of the input confidence interval error bars are across 10 retrainings of the model.
X(z). The features with high values are those that the learned function is most b, Example visualization of relevant features—the real part of the meridional
sensitive to and are probably relevant for further exploration. The 95% translation against signature, coloured by the longitudinal translation.
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 4 ---
z: Pair of permutations X(z): Unlabelled Bruhat interval Y(z): KL polynomial
(03214), (34201) 1 + q2
(021435), (240513) 1 + 2q + q2
Fig. 4 | Two example dataset elements, one from S and one from S. The combinatorial invariance conjecture states that the KL polynomial of a pair of
5 6
permutations should be computable from their unlabelled Bruhat interval, but no such function was previously known.
Coxeter groups). The combinatorial invariance conjecture is a fascinating Further structural evidence was found by calculating salient subgraphs
open conjecture concerning KL polynomials that has stood for 40 years, that attribution techniques determined were most relevant and analysing
with only partial progress29. It states that the KL polynomial of two ele- the edge distribution in these graphs compared to the original graphs.
ments in a symmetric group S can be calculated from their unlabelled In Fig. 5a, we aggregate the relative frequency of the edges in the salient
N
Bruhat interval30, a directed graph. One barrier to progress in understand- subgraphs by the reflection that they represent. It shows that extremal
ing the relationship between these objects is that the Bruhat intervals for reflections (those of the form (0, i) or (i, N − 1) for S ) appear more com-
N
non-trivial KL polynomials (those that are not equal to 1) are very large monly in salient subgraphs than one would expect, at the expense of
graphs that are difficult to develop intuition about. Some examples simple reflections (those of the form (i, i + 1)), which is confirmed over
of small Bruhat intervals and their KL polynomials are shown in Fig. 4. many retrainings of the model in Fig. 5b. This is notable because the
We took the conjecture as our initial hypothesis, and found that a edge labels are not given to the network and are not recoverable from
supervised learning model was able to predict the KL polynomial from the unlabelled Bruhat interval. From the definition of KL polynomials,
the Bruhat interval with reasonably high accuracy. By experimenting on it is intuitive that the distinction between simple and non-simple reflec-
the way in which we input the Bruhat interval to the network, it became tions is relevant for calculating it; however, it was not initially obvious
apparent that some choices of graphs and features were particularly con- why extremal reflections would be overrepresented in salient subgraphs.
ducive to accurate predictions. In particular, we found that a subgraph Considering this observation led us to the discovery that there is a natural
inspired by prior work31 may be sufficient to calculate the KL polynomial, decomposition of an interval into two parts—a hypercube induced by
and this was supported by a much more accurate estimated function. one set of extremal edges and a graph isomorphic to an interval in S .
N−1
a b
0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Second reflection index
c
Inductive
Hypercube
0 1 2 34 5 6 7
Bruhatintervalof
Nature | Vol 600 | 2 December 2021 | 73
xedni
noitcefler
tsriF
45 Trained * 40
Baseline
****
****
6 78
devresbo
egatnecreP
1 30 40 2
3 20 35
4 10
5 30
0
6
25
7 –10
8
–20 20
Extremal Simple Other
Edge type
First-order neighbours Hypercube
021435 – 240513 and diamonds decomposition
Fig. 5 | Representation theory attribution. a, An example heatmap of significance level shown was determined using a two-sided two-sample t-test.
the percentage increase in reflections present in the salient subgraphs *p < 0.05; ****p < 0.0001. c, Illustration for the interval 021435–240513 ∈ S 6
compared with the average across intervals in the dataset when predicting q4. of the interesting substructures that were discovered through the iterative
b, The percentage of observed edges of each type in the salient subgraph for 10 process of hypothesis, supervised learning and attribution. The subgraph
retrainings of the model compared to 10 bootstrapped samples of the same inspired by previous work31 is highlighted in red, the hypercube in green and
size from the dataset. The error bars are 95% confidence intervals, and the the decomposition component isomporphic to an interval in S in blue.
N−1
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 5 ---
Article
The importance of these two structures, illustrated in Fig. 5c, led acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author con-
to a proof that the KL polynomial can be computed directly from the tributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code
hypercube and S components through a beautiful formula that is availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04086-x.
N−1
summarized in the Supplementary Information. A further detailed
treatment of the mathematical results is given in ref. 32. 1. Borwein, J. & Bailey, D. Mathematics by Experiment (CRC, 2008).
2. Birch, B. J. & Swinnerton-Dyer, H. P. F. Notes on elliptic curves. II. J. Reine Angew. Math.
1965, 79–108 (1965).
Theorem: Every Bruhat interval admits a canonical hypercube decom- 3. Carlson, J. et al. The Millennium Prize Problems (American Mathematical Soc., 2006).
position along its extremal reflections, from which the KL polynomial 4. Brenti, F. Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials: history, problems, and combinatorial invariance.
is directly computable. Sémin. Lothar. Combin. 49, B49b (2002).
5. Hoche, R. Nicomachi Geraseni Pythagorei Introductionis Arithmeticae Libri 2
(In aedibus BG Teubneri, 1866).
Remarkably, further tests suggested that all hypercube decomposi- 6. Khovanov, M. Patterns in knot cohomology, I. Exp. Math. 12, 365–374 (2003).
7. Appel, K. I. & Haken, W. Every Planar Map Is Four Colorable Vol. 98 (American
tions correctly determine the KL polynomial. This has been computa-
Mathematical Soc., 1989).
tionally verified for all of the ∼3 × 106 intervals in the symmetric groups 8. Scholze, P. Half a year of the Liquid Tensor Experiment: amazing developments Xena
up to S and more than 1.3 × 105 non-isomorphic intervals sampled from https://xenaproject.wordpress.com/2021/06/05/half-a-year-of-the-liquid-tensor-
7
experiment-amazing-developments/ (2021).
the symmetric groups S and S.
8 9 9. Fajtlowicz, S. in Annals of Discrete Mathematics Vol. 38 113–118 (Elsevier, 1988).
10. Larson, C. E. in DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science
Conjecture: The KL polynomial of an unlabelled Bruhat interval can be cal- Vol. 69 (eds Fajtlowicz, S. et al.) 297–318 (AMS & DIMACS, 2005).
11. Raayoni, G. et al. Generating conjectures on fundamental constants with the Ramanujan
culated using the previous formula with any hypercube decomposition.
machine. Nature 590, 67–73 (2021).
12. MacKay, D. J. C. Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms (Cambridge Univ.
This conjectured solution, if proven true, would settle the combinatorial Press, 2003).
13. Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Springer, 2006).
invariance conjecture for symmetric groups. This is a promising direction
14. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 (2015).
as not only is the conjecture empirically verified up to quite large examples, 15. Raghu, M. & Schmidt, E. A survey of deep learning for scientific discovery. Preprint at
but it also has a particularly nice form that suggests potential avenues for https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11755 (2020).
16. Wagner, A. Z. Constructions in combinatorics via neural networks. Preprint at
attacking the conjecture. This case demonstrates how non-trivial insights
https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14516 (2021).
about the behaviour of large mathematical objects can be obtained from 17. Peifer, D., Stillman, M. & Halpern-Leistner, D. Learning selection strategies in Buchberger’s
trained models, such that new structure can be discovered. algorithm. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.01917 (2020).
18. Lample, G. & Charton, F. Deep learning for symbolic mathematics. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01412 (2019).
19. He, Y.-H. Machine-learning mathematical structures. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
Conclusion abs/2101.06317 (2021).
20. Carifio, J., Halverson, J., Krioukov, D. & Nelson, B. D. Machine learning in the string
In this work we have demonstrated a framework for mathematicians
landscape. J. High Energy Phys. 2017, 157 (2017).
to use machine learning that has led to mathematical insight across 21. Heal, K., Kulkarni, A. & Sertöz, E. C. Deep learning Gauss-Manin connections.
two distinct disciplines: one of the first connections between the alge- Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.13786 (2020).
22. Hughes, M. C. A neural network approach to predicting and computing knot invariants.
braic and geometric structure of knots and a proposed resolution to a
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05744 (2016).
long-standing open conjecture in representation theory. Rather than use 23. Levitt, J. S. F., Hajij, M. & Sazdanovic, R. Big data approaches to knot theory:
machine learning to directly generate conjectures, we focus on helping understanding the structure of the Jones polynomial. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1912.10086 (2019).
guide the highly tuned intuition of expert mathematicians, yielding
24. Jejjala, V., Kar, A. & Parrikar, O. Deep learning the hyperbolic volume of a knot. Phys. Lett. B
results that are both interesting and deep. It is clear that intuition 799, 135033 (2019).
plays an important role in elite performance in many human pursuits. 25. Tao, T. There’s more to mathematics than rigour and proofs Blog https://terrytao.wordpress.
com/career-advice/theres-more-to-mathematics-than-rigour-and-proofs/ (2016).
For example, it is critical for top Go players and the success of AlphaGo
26. Kashaev, R. M. The hyperbolic volume of knots from the quantum dilogarithm. Lett. Math.
(ref. 33) came in part from its ability to use machine learning to learn Phys. 39, 269–275 (1997).
elements of play that humans perform intuitively. It is similarly seen 27. Davies, A., Lackenby, M., Juhasz, A. & Tomašev, N. The signature and cusp geometry of
hyperbolic knots. Preprint at arxiv.org (in the press).
as critical for top mathematicians—Ramanujan was dubbed the Prince
28. Curtis, C. W. & Reiner, I. Representation Theory of Finite Groups and Associative Algebras
of Intuition34 and it has inspired reflections by famous mathematicians Vol. 356 (American Mathematical Soc., 1966).
on its place in their field35,36. As mathematics is a very different, more 29. Brenti, F., Caselli, F. & Marietti, M. Special matchings and Kazhdan–Lusztig polynomials.
Adv. Math. 202, 555–601 (2006).
cooperative endeavour than Go, the role of AI in assisting intuition is 30. Verma, D.-N. Structure of certain induced representations of complex semisimple Lie
far more natural. Here we show that there is indeed fruitful space to algebras. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 74, 160–166 (1968).
assist mathematicians in this aspect of their work. 31. Braden, T. & MacPherson, R. From moment graphs to intersection cohomology.
Math. Ann. 321, 533–551 (2001).
Our case studies demonstrate how a foundational connection in a 32. Blundell, C., Buesing, L., Davies, A., Veličković, P. & Williamson, G. Towards combinatorial
well-studied and mathematically interesting area can go unnoticed, invariance for Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials. Preprint at arxiv.org (in the press).
and how the framework allows mathematicians to better understand 33. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.
Nature 529, 484–489 (2016).
the behaviour of objects that are too large for them to otherwise 34. Kanigel, R. The Man Who Knew Infinity: a Life of the Genius Ramanujan (Simon and
observe patterns in. There are limitations to where this framework Schuster, 2016).
will be useful—it requires the ability to generate large datasets of the 35. Poincaré, H. The Value of Science: Essential Writings of Henri Poincaré (Modern Library, 1907).
36. Hadamard, J. The Mathematician’s Mind (Princeton Univ. Press, 1997).
representations of objects and for the patterns to be detectable in
examples that are calculable. Further, in some domains the functions of Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
interest may be difficult to learn in this paradigm. However, we believe
there are many areas that could benefit from our methodology. More Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
broadly, it is our hope that this framework is an effective mechanism to 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
allow for the introduction of machine learning into mathematicians’ credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license,
work, and encourage further collaboration between the two fields. and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
Online content need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license,
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum- visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, © The Author(s) 2021
74 | Nature | Vol 600 | 2 December 2021
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 6 ---
Methods initial general hypothesis was that the hyperbolic invariants would
be predictive of algebraic invariants. The specific hypothesis we in-
Framework vestigated was that the geometry is predictive of the signature. The
Supervised learning. In the supervised learning stage, the mathema- signature is an ideal candidate as it is a well-understood and common
tician proposes a hypothesis that there exists a relationship between invariant, it is easy to calculate for large knots and it is an integer, which
X(z) and Y(z). In this work we assume that there is no known function makes the prediction task particularly straightforward (compared to,
mapping from X(z) to Y(z), which in turn implies that X is not invertible for example, a polynomial).
(otherwise there would exist a known function Y ° X −1). While there may
still be value to this process when the function is known, we leave this Data generation. We generated a number of datasets from different
for future work. To test the hypothesis that X and Y are related, we gen- distributions P on the set of knots using the SnapPy software pack-
Z
erate a dataset of X(z), Y(z) pairs, where z is sampled from a distribution age45, as follows.
P
Z
. The results of the subsequent stages will hold true only for the dis- 1. All knots up to 16 crossings (∼1.7 × 106 knots), taken from the Regina
tribution P, and not the whole space Z. Initially, sensible choices for P census46.
Z Z
would be, for example, uniformly over the first N items for Z with a 2. Random knot diagrams of 80 crossings generated by SnapPy’s ran-
notion of ordering, or uniformly at random where possible. In subse- dom_link function (∼106 knots). As random knot generation can po-
quent iterations, P may be chosen to understand the behaviour on tentially lead to duplicates, we calculate a large number of invariants
Z
different parts of the space Z (for example, regions of Z that may be for each knot diagram and remove any samples that have identical
more likely to provide counterexamples to a particular hypothesis). invariants to a previous sample, as they are likely to represent that
To first test whether a relation between X(z) and Y(z) can be found, we same knot with very high probability.
use supervised learning to train a function fˆ that approximately maps 3. Knots obtained as the closures of certain braids. Unlike the previous
X(z) to Y(z). In this work we use neural networks as the supervised learn- two datasets, the knots that were produced here are not, in any sense,
ing method, in part because they can be easily adapted to many differ- generic. Instead, they were specifically constructed to disprove
ent types of X and Y and knowledge of any inherent geometry (in terms Conjecture 1. The braids that we used were 4-braids (n = 11,756),
of invariances and symmetries) of the input domain X can be incorpo- 5-braids (n = 13,217) and 6-braids (n = 10,897). In terms of the stand-
rated into the architecture of the network37. We consider a relationship ard generators σ for these braid groups, the braids were chosen to
i
between X(z) and Y(z) to be found if the accuracy of the learned function be (σn1σn2...σnk)N . The integers i were chosen uniformly at random
fˆ is statistically above chance on further samples from P on which the for th
i1
e a
i2
pprop
ik
riate braid group
j
. The powers n were chosen uni-
Z j
model was not trained. The converse is not true; namely, if the model formly at random in the ranges [−10, −3] and [3, 10]. The final power
cannot predict the relationship better than chance, it may mean that N was chosen uniformly between 1 and 10. The quantity ∑ |n| was
i
a pattern exists, but is sufficiently complicated that it cannot be cap- restricted to be at most 15 for 5-braids and 6-braids and 12 for
tured by the given model and training procedure. If it does indeed 4-braids, and the total number of crossings N ∑ |n| was restricted to
i
exist, this can give a mathematician confidence to pursue a particular lie in the range between 10 and 60. The rationale for these restrictions
line of enquiry in a problem that may otherwise be only speculative. was to ensure a rich set of examples that were small enough to avoid
an excessive number of failures in the invariant computations.
Attribution techniques. If a relationship is found, the attribution stage For the above datasets, we computed a number of algebraic and geo-
is to probe the learned function fˆ with attribution techniques to further metric knot invariants. Different datasets involved computing different
understand the nature of the relationship. These techniques attempt subsets of these, depending on their role in forming and examining the
to explain what features or structures are relevant to the predictions main conjecture. Each of the datasets contains a subset of the follow-
made by fˆ, which can be used to understand what parts of the problem ing list of invariants: signature, slope, volume, meridional translation,
are relevant to explore further. There are many attribution techniques longitudinal translation, injectivity radius, positivity, Chern–Simons
in the body of literature on machine learning and statistics, including invariant, symmetry group, hyperbolic torsion, hyperbolic adjoint tor-
stepwise forward feature selection38, feature occlusion and attention sion, invariant trace field, normal boundary slopes and length spectrum
weights39. In this work we use gradient-based techniques40, broadly including the linking numbers of the short geodesics.
similar to sensitivity analysis in classical statistics and sometimes re- The computation of the canonical triangulation of randomly gener-
ferred to as saliency maps. These techniques attribute importance to ated knots fails in SnapPy in our data generation process in between
the elements of X(z), by calculating how much fˆ changes in predictions 0.6% and 1.7% of the cases, across datasets. The computation of the
of Y(z) given small changes in X(z). We believe these are a particularly injectivity radius fails between 2.8% of the time on smaller knots up to
useful class of attribution techniques as they are conceptually simple, 7.8% of the time on datasets of knots with a higher number of crossings.
flexible and easy to calculate with machine learning libraries that sup- On knots up to 16 crossings from the Regina dataset, the injectivity
port automatic differentiation41–43. Information extracted via attribu- radius computation failed in 5.2% of the cases. Occasional failures can
tion techniques can then be useful to guide the next steps of mathe- occur in most of the invariant computations, in which case the compu-
matical reasoning, such as conjecturing closed-form candidates f′, tations continue for the knot in question for the remaining invariants
altering the sampling distribution P or generating new hypotheses in the requested set. Additionally, as the computational complexity of
Z
about the object of interest z, as shown in Fig. 1. This can then lead to some invariants is high, operations can time out if they take more than
an improved or corrected version of the conjectured relationship be- 5 min for an invariant. This is a flexible bound and ultimately a trade-off
tween these quantities. that we have used only for the invariants that were not critical for our
analysis, to avoid biasing the results.
Topology
Problem framing. Not all knots admit a hyperbolic geometry; however, Data encoding. The following encoding scheme was used for con-
most do, and all knots can be constructed from hyperbolic and torus verting the different types of features into real valued inputs for the
knots using satellite operations44. In this work we focus only on hyper- network: reals directly encoded; complex numbers as two reals cor-
bolic knots. We characterize the hyperbolic structure of the knot com- responding to the real and imaginary parts; categoricals as one-hot
plement by a number of easily computable invariants. These invariants vectors.
do not fully define the hyperbolic structure, but they are representative All features are normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by
of the most commonly interesting properties of the geometry. Our the variance. For simplicity, in Fig. 3a, the salience values of categoricals
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 7 ---
Article
are aggregated by taking the maximum value of the saliencies of their (for example, to ~2.9 million intervals in S ). We further reduce the
9
encoded features. dataset by including a single interval for each distinct KL polynomial
for all graphs with the same number of nodes, resulting in 24,322
Model and training procedure. The model architecture used for the non-isomorphic graphs for S. We split the intervals randomly into
9
experiments was a fully connected, feed-forward neural network, with train/test partitions at 80%/20%.
hidden unit sizes [300, 300, 300] and sigmoid activations. The task was
framed as a multi-class classification problem, with the distinct values Data encoding. The Bruhat interval of a pair of permutations is a par-
of the signature as classes, cross-entropy loss as an optimizable loss tially ordered set of the elements of the group, and it can be represented
function and test classification accuracy as a metric of performance. as a directed acyclic graph where each node is labelled by a permuta-
It is trained for a fixed number of steps using a standard optimizer tion, and each edge is labelled by a reflection. We add two features at
(Adam). All settings were chosen as a priori reasonable values and did each node representing the in-degree and out-degree of that node.
not need to be optimized.
Model and training procedure. For modelling the Bruhat intervals,
Process. First, to assess whether there may be a relationship between we used a particular GraphNet architecture called a message-passing
the geometry and algebra of a knot, we trained a feed-forward neural neural network (MPNN)48. The design of the model architecture (in
network to predict the signature from measurements of the geometry terms of activation functions and directionality) was motivated by the
on a dataset of randomly sampled knots. The model was able to achieve algorithms for computing KL polynomials from labelled Bruhat inter-
an accuracy of 78% on a held-out test set, with no errors larger than ±2. vals. While labelled Bruhat intervals contain privileged information,
This is substantially higher than chance (a baseline accuracy of 25%), these algorithms hinted at the kind of computation that may be useful
which gave us strong confidence that a relationship may exist. for computing KL polynomial coefficients. Accordingly, we designed
To understand how this prediction is being made by the network, our MPNN to algorithmically align to this computation49. The model is
we used gradient-based attribution to determine which measurements bi-directional, with a hidden layer width of 128, four propagation steps
of the geometry are most relevant to the signature. We do this using a and skip connections. We treat the prediction of each coefficient of the
simple sensitivity measure r that averages the gradient of the loss L KL polynomial as a separate classification problem.
i
with respect to a given input feature x over all of the examples x in a
i
dataset X: Process. First, to gain confidence that the conjecture is correct, we
trained a model to predict coefficients of the KL polynomial from the
rr= 1 ∑ ∂L (3) unlabelled Bruhat interval. We were able to do so across the different
i X xx∈X ∂xx i coefficients with reasonable accuracy (Extended Data Table 1) giving
some evidence that a general function may exist, as a four-step MPNN
This quantity for each input feature is shown in Fig. 3a, where we can is a relatively simple function class. We trained a GraphNet model on
determine that the relevant measurements of the geometry appear to the basis of a newly hypothesized representation and could achieve
be what is known as the cusp shape: the meridional translation, which significantly better performance, lending evidence that it is a suf-
we will denote μ, and the longitudinal translation, which we will denote ficient and helpful representation to understand the KL polynomial.
λ. This was confirmed by training a new model to predict the signature To understand how the predictions were being made by the learned
from only these three measurements, which was able to achieve the function fˆ, we used gradient-based attribution to define a salient sub-
same level of performance as the original model. graph S for each example interval G, induced by a subset of nodes in
G
To confirm that the slope is a sufficient aspect of the geometry to that interval, where L is the loss and x is the feature for vertex v:
v
focus on, we trained a model to predict the signature from the slope
alone. Visual inspection of the slope and signature in Extended Data S =  v∈G ∂L >C    (4)
Fig. 1a, b shows a clear linear trend, and training a linear model on this G  ∂x v k 
data results in a test accuracy of 78%, which is equivalent to the predic-
tive power of the original model. This implies that the slope linearly We then aggregated the edges by their edge type (each is a reflection)
captures all of the information about the signature that the original and compared the frequency of their occurrence to the overall data-
model had extracted from the geometry. set. The effect on extremal edges was present in the salient subgraphs
for predictions of the higher-order terms (q3, q4), which are the more
Evaluation. The confidence intervals on the feature saliencies were complicated and less well-understood terms.
calculated by retraining the model 10 times with a different train/test
split and a different random seed initializing both the network weights Evaluation. The threshold C for salient nodes was chosen a priori as the
k
and training procedure. 99th percentile of attribution values across the dataset, although the re-
sults are present for different values of C in the range [95, 99.5]. In Fig. 5a,
k
Representation theory we visualize a measure of edge attribution for a particular snapshot of
Data generation. For our main dataset we consider the symmetric a trained model for expository purposes. This view will change across
groups up to S. The first symmetric group that contains a non-trivial time and random seeds, but we can confirm that the pattern remains by
9
Bruhat interval whose KL polynomial is not simply 1 is S, and the larg- looking at aggregate statistics over many runs of training the model, as in
5
est interval in S contains 9! ≈ 3.6 × 105 nodes, which starts to pose Fig. 5b. In this diagram, the two-sample two-sided t-test statistics are as
9
computational issues when used as inputs to networks. The number follows—simple edges: t = 25.7, P = 4.0 × 10−10; extremal edges: t = −13.8,
of intervals in a symmetric group S is O(N!2), which results in many P = 1.1 × 10−7; other edges: t = −3.2, P = 0.01. These significance results
N
billions of intervals in S. The distribution of coefficients of the KL are robust to different settings of the hyper-parameters of the model.
9
polynomials uniformly across intervals is very imbalanced, as higher
coefficients are especially rare and associated with unknown com-
Code availability
plex structure. To adjust for this and simplify the learning problem,
we take advantage of equivalence classes of Bruhat intervals that Interactive notebooks to regenerate the results for both knot theory
eliminate many redundant small polynomials47. This has the added and representation theory have been made available for download at
benefit of reducing the number of intervals per symmetric group https://github.com/deepmind.
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 8 ---
48. Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S. S., Riley, P. F., Vinyals, O. & Dahl, G. E. Neural message
Data availability passing for quantum chemistry. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212
(2017).
The generated datasets used in the experiments have been made avail- 49. Veličković, P., Ying, R., Padovano, M., Hadsell, R. & Blundell, C. Neural execution of graph
able for download at https://github.com/deepmind. algorithms. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10593 (2019).
37. Bronstein, M. M., Bruna, J., Cohen, T. & Veličković, P. Geometric deep learning: grids, Acknowledgements We thank J. Ellenberg, S. Mohamed, O. Vinyals, A. Gaunt, A. Fawzi and
groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.13478 D. Saxton for advice and comments on early drafts; J. Vonk for contemporary supporting work;
(2021). X. Glorot and M. Overlan for insight and assistance; and A. Pierce, N. Lambert, G. Holland,
38. Efroymson, M. A. in Mathematical Methods for Digital Computers 191–203 (John Wiley, R. Ahamed and C. Meyer for assistance coordinating the research. This research was funded by
1960). DeepMind.
39. Xu, K. et al. Show, attend and tell: neural image caption generation with visual
attention. In Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning 2048–2057 (PMLR, Author contributions A.D., D.H. and P.K. conceived of the project. A.D., A.J. and M.L.
2015). discovered the knot theory results, with D.Z. and N.T. running additional experiments. A.D., P.V.
40. Sundararajan, M., Taly, A. & Yan, Q. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. and G.W. discovered the representation theory results, with P.V. designing the model, L.B.
In Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning 3319–3328 (PMLR, 2017). running additional experiments, and C.B. providing advice and ideas. S.B. and R.T. provided
41. Bradbury, J. et al. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs (2018); additional support, experiments and infrastructure. A.D., D.H. and P.K. directed and managed
https://github.com/google/jax the project. A.D. and P.V. wrote the paper with help and feedback from P.B., C.B., M.L., A.J.,
42. Martín A. B. A. D. I. et al. TensorFlow: large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous G.W., P.K. and D.H.
systems (2015); https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4724125.
43. Paszke, A. et al. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
(eds Wallach, H. et al.) 8024–8035 (Curran Associates, 2019).
44. Thurston, W. P. Three dimensional manifolds, Kleinian groups and hyperbolic geometry. Additional information
Bull. Am. Math. Soc 6, 357–381 (1982). Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
45. Culler, M., Dunfield, N. M., Goerner, M. & Weeks, J. R. SnapPy, a computer program for https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04086-x.
studying the geometry and topology of 3-manifolds (2020); http://snappy.computop.org. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Alex Davies or Pushmeet
46. Burton, B. A. The next 350 million knots. In Proc. 36th International Symposium on Kohli.
Computational Geometry (SoCG 2020) (Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Peer review information Nature thanks Sanjeev Arora, Christian Stump and the other,
2020). anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer
47. Warrington, G. S. Equivalence classes for the μ-coefficient of Kazhdan–Lusztig reports are available.
polynomials in S n. Exp. Math. 20, 457–466 (2011). Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 9 ---
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Empirical relationship between slope and signature. a Signature vs slope for random dataset. b Signature vs slope for Regina dataset.
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 10 ---
Extended Data Table 1 | Model accuracies at predicting KL coefficients from Bruhat intervals in S
9
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved

--- PAGE 11 ---
Terms and Conditions
S pringer Nature journal content, brought to you courtesy of Springer Nature Customer Service Center GmbH (“Springer Nature”).
Springer Nature supports a reasonable amount of sharing of research papers by authors, subscribers and authorised users (“Users”), for small-
scale personal, non-commercial use provided that all copyright, trade and service marks and other proprietary notices are maintained. By
accessing, sharing, receiving or otherwise using the Springer Nature journal content you agree to these terms of use (“Terms”). For these
p urposes, Springer Nature considers academic use (by researchers and students) to be non-commercial.
These Terms are supplementary and will apply in addition to any applicable website terms and conditions, a relevant site licence or a personal
subscription. These Terms will prevail over any conflict or ambiguity with regards to the relevant terms, a site licence or a personal subscription
(to the extent of the conflict or ambiguity only). For Creative Commons-licensed articles, the terms of the Creative Commons license used will
a pply.
We collect and use personal data to provide access to the Springer Nature journal content. We may also use these personal data internally within
ResearchGate and Springer Nature and as agreed share it, in an anonymised way, for purposes of tracking, analysis and reporting. We will not
otherwise disclose your personal data outside the ResearchGate or the Springer Nature group of companies unless we have your permission as
d etailed in the Privacy Policy.
While Users may use the Springer Nature journal content for small scale, personal non-commercial use, it is important to note that Users may
n ot:
1.use such content for the purpose of providing other users with access on a regular or large scale basis or as a means to circumvent access
control;
2.use such content where to do so would be considered a criminal or statutory offence in any jurisdiction, or gives rise to civil liability, or is
otherwise unlawful;
3.falsely or misleadingly imply or suggest endorsement, approval , sponsorship, or association unless explicitly agreed to by Springer Nature in
writing;
4.use bots or other automated methods to access the content or redirect messages
5.override any security feature or exclusionary protocol; or
6.share the content in order to create substitute for Springer Nature products or services or a systematic database of Springer Nature journal
content.
In line with the restriction against commercial use, Springer Nature does not permit the creation of a product or service that creates revenue,
royalties, rent or income from our content or its inclusion as part of a paid for service or for other commercial gain. Springer Nature journal
content cannot be used for inter-library loans and librarians may not upload Springer Nature journal content on a large scale into their, or any
o ther, institutional repository.
These terms of use are reviewed regularly and may be amended at any time. Springer Nature is not obligated to publish any information or
content on this website and may remove it or features or functionality at our sole discretion, at any time with or without notice. Springer Nature
m ay revoke this licence to you at any time and remove access to any copies of the Springer Nature journal content which have been saved.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, Springer Nature makes no warranties, representations or guarantees to Users, either express or implied
with respect to the Springer nature journal content and all parties disclaim and waive any implied warranties or warranties imposed by law,
i ncluding merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.
Please note that these rights do not automatically extend to content, data or other material published by Springer Nature that may be licensed
f rom third parties.
If you would like to use or distribute our Springer Nature journal content to a wider audience or on a regular basis or in any other manner not
e xpressly permitted by these Terms, please contact Springer Nature at
onlineservice@springernature.com
