
--- PAGE 1 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
JAN 12, 2023
DeepMin
d’s CEO
Helped
Take AI
Mainstre
am. Now
Demis Hassabis by the Helicase—a
sculpture that uses DNA’s helix shape as a
He’s
symbol of human endeavor and the pursuit
of knowledge—at DeepMind’s headquarters
in London on Nov. 3, 2022James Day for
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 1 of 16

--- PAGE 2 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
TIME
Urging
Caution
bbbbyyyyBBBBiiiillllllllyyyy PPPPeeeerrrrrrrriiiiggggoooo
CORRESPONDENT
Demis Hassabis stands halfway up a spiral staircase, surveying the cathedral he
built. Behind him, light glints off the rungs of a golden helix rising up through the
staircase’s airy well. The DNA sculpture, spanning three floors, is the centerpiece of
DeepMind’s recently opened London headquarters. It’s an artistic representation of
the code embedded in the nucleus of nearly every cell in the human body.
“Although we work on making machines smart, we wanted to keep humanity at the
center of what we’re doing here,” Hassabis, DeepMind’s CEO and co-founder, tells
TIME. This building, he says, is a “cathedral to knowledge.” Each meeting room is
named after a famous scientist or philosopher; we meet in the one dedicated to
James Clerk Maxwell, the man who first theorized electromagnetic radiation. “I’ve
always thought of DeepMind as an ode to intelligence,” Hassabis says.
Advertisement
Hassabis, 46, has always been obsessed with intelligence: what it is, the possibilities
it unlocks, and how to acquire more of it. He was the second-best chess player in
the world for his age when he was 12, and he graduated from high school a year
early. As an adult he strikes a somewhat diminutive figure, but his intellectual
presence fills the room. “I want to understand the big questions, the really big ones
that you normally go into philosophy or physics if you’re interested in,” he says. “I
thought building AI would be the fastest route to answer some of those questions.”
DeepMind—a subsidiary of Google’s parent company, Alphabet—is one of the
world’s leading artificial intelligence labs. Last summer it announced that one of its
algorithms, AlphaFold, had predicted the 3D structures of nearly all the proteins
known to humanity, and that the company was making the technology behind it
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 2 of 16

--- PAGE 3 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
freely available. Scientists had long been familiar with the sequences of amino acids
that make up proteins, the building blocks of life, but had never cracked how they
fold up into the complex 3D shapes so crucial to their behavior in the human body.
AlphaFold has already been a force multiplier for hundreds of thousands of
scientists working on efforts such as developing malaria vaccines, fighting antibiotic
resistance, and tackling plastic pollution, the company says. Now DeepMind is
applying similar machine-learning techniques to the puzzle of nuclear fusion,
hoping it helps yield an abundant source of cheap, zero-carbon energy that could
wean the global economy off fossil fuels at a critical juncture in the climate crisis.
Hassabis says these efforts are just the beginning. He and his colleagues have been
working toward a much grander ambition: creating artificial general intelligence, or
AGI, by building machines that can think, learn, and be set to solve humanity’s
toughest problems. Today’s AI is narrow, brittle, and often not very intelligent at all.
But AGI, Hassabis believes, will be an “epoch-defining” technology—like the
harnessing of electricity—that will change the very fabric of human life. If he’s right,
it could earn him a place in history that would relegate the namesakes of his
meeting rooms to mere footnotes.
Advertisement
But with AI’s promise also comes peril. In recent months, researchers building an AI
system to design new drugs revealed that their tool could be easily repurposed to
make deadly new chemicals. A separate AI model trained to spew out toxic hate
speech went viral, exemplifying the risk to vulnerable communities online. And
inside AI labs around the world, policy experts were grappling with near-term
questions like what to do when an AI has the potential to be commandeered by
rogue states to mount widespread hacking campaigns or infer state-level nuclear
secrets. In December 2022, ChatGPT, a chatbot designed by DeepMind’s rival
OpenAI, went viral for its seeming ability to write almost like a human—but faced
criticism for its susceptibility to racism and misinformation. So did the tiny company
Prisma Labs, for its Lensa app’s AI-enhanced selfies. But many users complained
Lensa sexualized their images, revealing biases in its training data. What was once a
field of a few deep-pocketed tech companies is becoming increasingly accessible.
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 3 of 16

--- PAGE 4 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
As computing power becomes cheaper and AI techniques become better known,
you no longer need a high-walled cathedral to perform cutting-edge research.
Read More: The Price of Your AI-Generated Selfie
It is in this uncertain climate that Hassabis agrees to a rare interview, to issue a stark
warning about his growing concerns. “I would advocate not moving fast and
breaking things,” he says, referring to an old Facebook motto that encouraged
engineers to release their technologies into the world first and fix any problems that
arose later. The phrase has since become synonymous with disruption. That culture,
subsequently emulated by a generation of startups, helped Facebook rocket to 3
billion users. But it also left the company entirely unprepared when disinformation,
hate speech, and even incitement to genocide began appearing on its platform.
Hassabis sees a similarly worrying trend developing with AI. He says AI is now “on
the cusp” of being able to make tools that could be deeply damaging to human
civilization, and urges his competitors to proceed with more caution than before.
“When it comes to very powerful technologies—and obviously AI is going to be one
of the most powerful ever—we need to be careful,” he says. “Not everybody is
thinking about those things. It’s like experimentalists, many of whom don’t realize
they’re holding dangerous material.” Worse still, Hassabis points out, we are the
guinea pigs.
Advertisement
Hassabis was just 15 when he walked into the Bullfrog video-game studios in
Guildford, in the rolling green hills just southwest of London. As a child he had
always been obsessed with games. Not just chess—the main source of his
expanding trophy cabinet—but the kinds you could play on early computers, too.
Now he wanted to help make them. He had entered a competition in a video-game
magazine to win an internship at the prestigious studio. His program—a Space
Invaders-style game where players shot at chess pieces descending from the top of
the screen—came in second place. He had to settle for a week’s work experience.
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 4 of 16

--- PAGE 5 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Hassabis, left, captaining the England under-11s chess team at the age of 9 Courtesy Demis Hassabis
Peter Molyneux, Bullfrog’s co-founder, still remembers first seeing Hassabis. “He
looked like an elf from Lord of the Rings,” Molyneux says. “This little slender kid
came in, who you would probably just walk past in the street and not even notice.
But there was a sparkle in his eyes: the sparkle of intelligence.” In a chance
conversation on the bus to Bullfrog’s Christmas party, the teenager captivated
Molyneux. “The whole of the journey there, and the whole of the journey back, was
the most intellectually stimulating conversation,” he recalls. They talked about the
philosophy of games, what it is about the human psyche that makes winning so
appealing, and whether you could imbue those same traits in a machine. “All the
time I’m thinking, This is just a kid!” He knew then this young man was destined for
great things.
The pair became fast friends. Hassabis returned to Bullfrog in the summer before he
left for the University of Cambridge, and spent much of that time with Molyneux
playing board and computer games. Molyneux recalls a fierce competitive streak. “I
beat him at almost all the computer games, especially the strategy games,”
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 5 of 16

--- PAGE 6 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Molyneux says. “He is an incredibly competitive person.” But Molyneux’s bragging
rights were short-lived. Together, in pursuit of interesting game dynamics that might
be the seed of the next hit video game, they invented a card-game they called
Dummy. Hassabis beat Molyneux 35 times in a row.
Advertisement
After graduating from Cambridge, Hassabis returned to Bullfrog to help Molyneux
build his most popular game to date: Theme Park, a simulation game giving the
player a God’s-eye view of an expanding fairground business. Hassabis went on to
establish his own game company before later deciding to study for a Ph.D. in
neuroscience. He wanted to understand the algorithmic level of the brain: not the
interactions between microscopic neurons but the larger architectures that seemed
to give rise to humanity’s powerful intelligence. “The mind is the most intriguing
object in the universe,” Hassabis says. He was trying to understand how it worked in
preparation for his life’s quest. “Without understanding that I had in mind AI the
whole time, it looks like a random path,” Hassabis says of his career trajectory:
chess, video games, neuroscience. “But I used every single scrap of that
experience.”
By 2013, when DeepMind was three years old, Google came knocking. A team of
Google executives flew to London in a private jet, and Hassabis wowed them by
showing them a prototype AI his team had taught to play the computer game
Breakout. DeepMind’s signature technique behind the algorithm, reinforcement
learning, was something Google wasn’t doing at the time. It was inspired by how the
human brain learns, an understanding Hassabis had developed during his time as a
neuroscientist. The AI would play the game millions of times, and was rewarded
every time it scored some points. Through a process of points-based reinforcement,
it would learn the optimum strategy. Hassabis and his colleagues fervently believed
in training AI in game environments, and the dividends of the approach impressed
the Google executives. “I loved them immediately,” says Alan Eustace, a former
senior vice president at Google who led the scouting trip.
Hassabis’ focus on the dangers of AI was evident from his first conversation with
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 6 of 16

--- PAGE 7 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Eustace. “He was thoughtful enough to understand that the technology had long-
term societal implications, and he wanted to understand those before the
technology was invented, not after the technology was deployed,” Eustace says. “It’s
like chess. What’s the endgame? How is it going to develop, not just two steps
ahead, but 20 steps ahead?”
Advertisement
Eustace assured Hassabis that Google shared those concerns, and that DeepMind’s
interests were aligned with its own. Google’s mission, Eustace said, was to index all
of humanity’s knowledge, make it accessible, and ultimately raise the IQ of the
world. “I think that resonated,” he says. The following year, Google acquired
DeepMind for some $500 million. Hassabis turned down a bigger offer from
Facebook. One reason, he says, was that, unlike Facebook, Google was “very happy
to accept” DeepMind’s ethical red lines “as part of the acquisition.” (There were
reports at the time that Google agreed to set up an independent ethics board to
ensure these lines were not crossed.) The founders of the fledgling AI lab also
reasoned that the megacorporation’s deep pockets would allow them access to
talent and computing power that they otherwise couldn’t afford.
In a glass cabinet spanning the far wall of the lobby at DeepMind’s London
headquarters, among other memorabilia from the first 12 years of the company’s life,
sits a large square of wood daubed with black scribbles. It’s a souvenir from
DeepMind’s first major coup. Soon after the Google acquisition, the company had
set itself the challenge of designing an algorithm that could beat the best player in
the world at the ancient Chinese board game Go. Chess had long ago been
conquered by brute-force computer programming, but Go was far more complex;
the best AI algorithms were still no match for top human players. DeepMind tackled
the problem the same way they’d cracked Breakout. It built a program that, after
being taught the rules of the game by observing human play, would play virtually
against itself millions of times. Through reinforcement learning, the algorithm would
update itself, reducing the “weights” of decisions that made it more likely to lose the
game, and increasing the “weights” that made it more likely to win. At a tournament
in Korea in March 2016, the algorithm—called AlphaGo—went up against Lee Sedol,
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 7 of 16

--- PAGE 8 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
one of the world’s top Go players. AlphaGo beat him four games to one. With a black
marker pen, the defeated Lee scrawled his signature on the back of the Go board on
which the fateful game had been played. Hassabis signed on behalf of AlphaGo, and
DeepMind kept the board as a trophy. Forecasters had not expected the milestone
to be passed for a decade. It was a vindication of Hassabis’ pitch to Google: that the
best way to push the frontier of AI was to focus on reinforcement learning in game
environments.
Advertisement
But just as DeepMind was scaling new heights, things were beginning to get
complicated. In 2015, two of its earliest investors, billionaires Peter Thiel and Elon
Musk, symbolically turned their backs on DeepMind by funding rival startup OpenAI.
That lab, subsequently bankrolled by $1 billion from Microsoft, also believed in the
possibility of AGI, but it had a very different philosophy for how to get there. It
wasn’t as interested in games. Much of its research focused not on reinforcement
learning but on unsupervised learning, a different technique that involves scraping
vast quantities of data from the internet and pumping it through neural networks. As
computers became more powerful and data more abundant, those techniques
appeared to be making huge strides in capability.
While DeepMind, Google, and other AI labs had been working on similar research
behind closed doors, OpenAI was more willing to let the public use its tools. In late
2022 it launched DALL·E 2, which can generate an image of almost any search term
imaginable, and the chatbot ChatGPT. Because both of these tools were trained on
data scraped from the internet, they were plagued by structural biases and
inaccuracies. DALL·E 2 is likely to illustrate “lawyers” as old white men and “flight
attendants” as young beautiful women, while ChatGPT is prone to confident
assertions of false information. In the wrong hands, a 2021 DeepMind research
paper says, language-generation tools like ChatGPT and its predecessor GPT-3
could turbocharge the spread of disinformation, facilitate government censorship or
surveillance, and perpetuate harmful stereotypes under the guise of objectivity.
(OpenAI acknowledges its apps have limitations, including biases, but says that it’s
working to minimize them and that its mission is to build safe AGI to benefit
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 8 of 16

--- PAGE 9 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
humanity.)
But despite Hassabis’s calls for the AI race to slow down, it appears DeepMind is not
immune from the competitive pressures. In early 2022, the company published a
blueprint for a faster engine. The piece of research, called Chinchilla, showed that
many of the industry’s most cutting-edge models had been trained ine$iciently, and
explained how they could deliver more capability with the same level of computing
power. Hassabis says DeepMind’s internal ethics board discussed whether releasing
the research would be unethical given the risk that it could allow less scrupulous
firms to release more powerful technologies without firm guardrails. One of the
reasons they decided to publish it anyway was because “we weren’t the only people
to know” about the phenomenon. He says that DeepMind is also considering
releasing its own chatbot, called Sparrow, for a “private beta” some time in 2023.
(The delay is in order for DeepMind to work on reinforcement learning-based
features that ChatGPT lacks, like citing its sources. “It’s right to be cautious on that
front,” Hassabis says.) But he admits that the company may soon need to change its
calculus. “We’re getting into an era where we have to start thinking about the
freeloaders, or people who are reading but not contributing to that information
base,” he says. “And that includes nation states as well.” He declines to name which
states he means—“it’s pretty obvious, who you might think”—but he suggests that
the AI industry’s culture of publishing its findings openly may soon need to end.
Advertisement
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 9 of 16

--- PAGE 10 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Hassabis celebrates DeepMind’s victory over Go player Lee Sedol, right, in South Korea in 2016 Lee Jin-man—AP
Hassabis wants the world to see DeepMind as a standard bearer of safe and ethical
AI research, leading by example in a field full of others focused on speed. DeepMind
has published “red lines” against unethical uses of its technology, including
surveillance and weaponry. But neither DeepMind nor Alphabet has publicly shared
what legal power DeepMind has to prevent its parent—a surveillance empire that
has dabbled in Pentagon contracts—from pursuing those goals with the AI
DeepMind builds. In 2021, Alphabet ended yearslong talks with DeepMind about the
subsidiary’s setting up an independent legal structure that would prevent its AI
being controlled by a single corporate entity, the Wall Street Journal reported.
Hassabis doesn’t deny DeepMind made these attempts, but downplays any
suggestion that he is concerned about the current structure being unsafe. When
asked to confirm or deny whether the independent ethics board rumored to have
been set up as part of the Google acquisition actually exists, he says he can’t,
because it’s “all confidential.” But he adds that DeepMind’s ethics structure has
“evolved” since the acquisition “into the structures that we have now.”
Hassabis says both DeepMind and Alphabet have committed to public ethical
frameworks and build safety into their tools from the very beginning. DeepMind has
its own internal ethics board, the Institutional Review Committee (IRC), with
representatives from all areas of the company, chaired by its chief operating o$icer,
Lila Ibrahim. The IRC meets regularly, Ibrahim says, and any disagreements are
escalated to DeepMind’s executive leaders for a final decision. “We operate with a
lot of freedom,” she says. “We have a separate review process: we have our own
internal ethics review committee; we collaborate on best practices and learnings.”
When asked what happens if DeepMind’s leadership team disagrees with Alphabet’s,
or if its “red lines” are crossed, Ibrahim only says, “We haven’t had that issue yet.”
Advertisement
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 10 of 16

--- PAGE 11 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
One of Hassabis’ favorite games right now is a strategy game called Polytopia. The
aim is to grow a small village into a world-dominating empire through gradual
technological advances. Fishing, for example, opens the door to seafaring, which
leads eventually to navies of your ships firing cannons and traversing oceans. By the
end of the game, if you’ve directed your technological progress astutely, you’ll sit
atop a shining, sophisticated empire with your enemies dead at your feet. (Elon
Musk, Hassabis says, is a fan too. The last time the pair spoke, a few months ago,
Polytopia was the main subject of their conversation. “We both like that game a lot,”
Hassabis says.)
While Hassabis’ worldview is much more nuanced—and cautious—it’s easy to see
why the game’s ethos resonates with him. He still appears to believe that
technological advancement is inherently good for humanity, and that under
capitalism it’s possible to predict and mitigate AI’s risks. “Advances in science and
technology: that’s what drives civilization,” he says.
MENU SUBSCRIBE
CLOSE
Introducing TIME Games… VIEW MORE
BACK TO LIST DDDDaaaavvvvoooossss 2222000022223333: CCCCoooommmmiiiinnnngggg TTTTooooggggeeeetttthhhheeeerrrr
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 11 of 16

--- PAGE 12 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Demis Hassabis at DeepMind’s headquarters in London on Nov. 3, 2022 James Day for TIME
Hassabis believes the wealth from AGI, if it arrives, should be redistributed. “I think
we need to make sure that the benefits accrue to as many people as possible—to all
of humanity, ideally.” He likes the ideas of universal basic income, under which every
citizen is given a monthly stipend from the government, and universal basic
services, where the state pays for basic living standards like transportation or
housing. He says an AGI-driven future should be more economically equal than
today’s world, without explaining how that system would work. “If you’re in a [world
of] radical abundance, there should be less room for that inequality and less ways
that could come about. So that’s one of the positive consequences of the AGI vision,
if it gets realized.”
Others are less optimistic that this utopian future will come to pass—given that the
past several decades of growth in the tech industry have coincided with huge
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 12 of 16

--- PAGE 13 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
increases in wealth inequality. “Major corporations, including the major corporation
that owns DeepMind, have to ensure they maximize value to shareholders; are not
focused really on addressing the climate crisis unless there is a profit in it; and are
certainly not interested in redistributing wealth when the whole goal of the
company is to accumulate further wealth and distribute it to shareholders,” says
Paris Marx, host of the podcast Tech Won’t Save Us. “Not recognizing those things is
really failing to fully consider the potential impacts of the technology.” Alphabet,
Amazon, and Meta were among the 20 corporations that spent the most money
lobbying U.S. lawmakers in 2022, according to transparency watchdog Open
Secrets. “What we lack is not the technology to address the climate crisis, or to
redistribute wealth,” Marx says. “What we lack is the political will. And it’s hard to see
how just creating a new technology is going to create the political will to actually
have these more structural transformations of society.”
Back at DeepMind’s spiral staircase, an employee explains that the DNA sculpture is
designed to rotate, but today the motor is broken. Closer inspection shows some of
the rungs of the helix are askew. At the bottom of the staircase there’s a notice on a
wooden stool in front of this giant metaphor for humanity. “Please don’t touch,” it
reads. “It’s very fragile and could easily be damaged.”
—With reporting by Mariah Espada and Solcyre Burga
Advertisement
JAN 12, 2023
The
Power of
Collabora
tion in a
Moment Local residents play a game of cricket outside of the Jharia
coalfield in Dhanbad, in the state of Jharkhand, and home to
India’s largest coal reserves.Sarker Protick for TIME
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 13 of 16

--- PAGE 14 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
of Crisis
bbbbyyyyEEEEddddwwwwaaaarrrrdddd FFFFeeeellllsssseeeennnntttthhhhaaaallll
FELSENTHAL IS THE
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
AND FORMER EDITOR IN
CHIEF OF TIME.
Last month, I was in Boston for the presentation of the Earthshot Prize, the annual
awards started by Prince William designed to help accelerate creative solutions to
the climate crisis. The roughly $6 million in grants—supported by donors including
TIME’s owners Marc and Lynne Benioff—went to five remarkable projects, from a
technology that turns carbon into rock to biodegradable seaweed-based packaging
for consumer goods (called Notpla for “not plastics”). At a gathering after the
ceremony, I was struck by the remarks of Earthshot board chair Christiana Figueres,
the former U.N. climate chief, who framed this moment in the planet’s 4.5 billion
years (no small task!) as one in which “the pen of history has been passed from
nature to humanity.”
CONTINUE READING
Advertisement
JAN 12, 2023
Allies
Are
Needed
to Create
a Happy
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 14 of 16

--- PAGE 15 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Society Kengo Sakurada, Group CEO of Sompo
Holdings Inc.
bbbbyyyyCCCCoooonnnntttteeeennnntttt FFFFrrrroooommmm SSSSoooommmmppppoooo
HHHHoooollllddddiiiinnnnggggssss
Today, with society becoming more unequal and fragmented, cooperation is
becoming more di$icult. How can we overcome our differences in positions and
interests and work together more deeply? The root principle of our behavior is the
same: we want to be happy. Under this idea, I believe people should pursue
happiness – but for all stakeholders in society. Many Westerners who traveled to
Japan in the late Edo period (1800s) wrote that Japanese society was full of
happiness. The person who played a leading role in opening Japan to the West,
Commodore Matthew Perry, also described Japan at that time: “the people seem
happy and contented.” The concept of Seikatsusha is key to creating such a happy
society. Learning, working, playing, eating – Seikatsusha is a Japanese word that
refers to people who live their daily lives in a multifaceted manner. For example, I
am a CEO, a consumer, and a grandfather. As a CEO, I aim to improve corporate
performance; as a consumer, I choose what I love at the supermarket; as a
grandfather, I hope for a future in which my grandchildren live happily.
CONTINUE READING
Advertisement
Sections More About Us Your
Subscriptions
Home The TIME Our
Vault Mission Subscribe
Politics
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 15 of 16

--- PAGE 16 ---
DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis Urges Caution on AI 13/05/2026, 08:33
Health TIME Contact Access My
Africa the Digital
AI
Editors Magazine
TIME
World
France Press Manage My
Room Subscription
Business
TIME For
Kids Media Kit Global
Science
Help
TIME Reprints &
Center
Climate
Futures Permissions
Buy an
Ideas
TIME Masthead
Issue
Studios
Entertainment
Careers
Shop the
Video
Cover
Sports
Site Map
Store
Red
Technology
Modern
Border
Give a Gift
Slavery
Newsletters
Supplied Statement
Partner
Content
© 2026 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms
of Service, Privacy Policy (Your Privacy Rights) and Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
.
TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers
may be subject to change without notice.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
https://time.com/collections/davos-2023/6246119/demis-hassabis-deepmind-interview/ Page 16 of 16
