
--- PAGE 1 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
BUSINESS TECH
Demis
Hassabis
Is
Preparing
for AI’s
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 1 of 16

--- PAGE 2 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
bbbbyyyyBBBBiiiillllllllyyyy PPPPeeeerrrrrrrriiiiggggoooo
Endgame
CORRESPONDENT
David Vintiner for TIME
ADD TIME ON GOOGLE
Updated: APR Published: APR
16, 2025 1:42 15, 2025 2:44 PM
PM GMT GMT
his story is part of the 2025 TIME100. Read Jennifer Doudna’s tribute to
T
Demis Hassabis here.
Demis Hassabis learned he had won the 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry just 20
minutes before the world did. The CEO of Google DeepMind, the tech giant’s
artificial intelligence lab, received a phone call with the good news at the last
minute, after a failed attempt by the Nobel Foundation to find his contact
information in advance. “I would have got a heart attack,” Hassabis quips, had he
learned about the prize from the television. Receiving the honor was a “lifelong
dream,” he says, one that “still hasn’t sunk in” when we meet five months later.
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 2 of 16

--- PAGE 3 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
Trending Shorts
MORE
Minneapolis Mayor Frey The Most Memorable Looks White House Insists Trump Is
Responds After Vice… from the 2026 Met Gala "Joking" About Canceling…
Hassabis received half of the award alongside a colleague, John Jumper, for the
design of AlphaFold: an AI tool that can predict the 3D structure of proteins using
only their amino acid sequences—something Hassabis describes as a “50-year
grand challenge” in the field of biology. Released freely by Google DeepMind for the
world toM uEsNeU five years ago, AlphaFold has revolutionized the workS UoBfS sCcRiIeBEntists
CLOSE
toiling on research as varied as malaria vaccines, human longevity, and cures for
cancer, allowing them to model protein structures in hours rather than years. The
Nobel Prizes in 202 I 4 n w tr e o r d e u t c h i e n g fi r T s I t M in E h G is a t m or e y s t … o recVoIEgWn iMzeO RthEe contributions of AI to
the field of science. If Hassabis gets his way, they won’t be the last.
AlphaFold’s impact may have been broad enough to win its creators a Nobel Prize,
but in the world of AI, it is seen as almost hopelessly narrow. It can model the
structures of proteins but not much else; it has no understanding of the wider
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 3 of 16

--- PAGE 4 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
world, cannot carry out research, nor can it make its own scientific breakthroughs.
Hassabis’s dream, and the wider industry’s, is to build AI that can do all of those
things and more, unlocking a future of almost unimaginable wonder. All human
diseases will be a thing of the past if this technology is created, he says. Energy will
be zero-carbon and free, allowing us to transcend the climate crisis and begin
restoring our planet’s ecosystems. Global conflicts over scarce resources will
dissipate, giving way to a new era of peace and abundance. “I think some of the
biggest problems that face us today as a society, whether that's climate or disease,
will be helped by AI solutions,” Hassabis says. “I'd be very worried about society
today if I didn't know that something as transformative as AI was coming down the
line.”
Advertisement
00:03 / 01:21
This hypothetical technology—known in the industry as Artificial General
Intelligence, or AGI—had long been seen as decades away. But the fast pace of
breakthroughs in computer science over the last few years has led top AI scientists
to radically revise their expectations of when it will arrive. Hassabis predicts AGI is
somewhere between five and 10 years away—a rather pessimistic view when judged
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 4 of 16

--- PAGE 5 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
by industry standards. OpenAI CEO Sam Altman has predicted AGI will arrive within
Trump’s second term, while Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei says it could come as
early as 2026.
Partially underlying these different predictions is a disagreement over what AGI
means. OpenAI’s definition, for instance, is rooted in cold business logic: a
technology that can perform most economically valuable tasks better than humans
can. Hassabis has a different bar, one focused instead on scientific discovery. He
believes AGI would be a technology that could not only solve existing problems, but
also come up with entirely new explanations for the universe. A test for its existence
might be whether a system could come up with general relativity with only the
information Einstein had access to; or if it could not only solve a longstanding
hypothesis in mathematics, but theorize an entirely new one. “I identify myself as a
scientist first and foremost,” Hassabis says. “The whole reason I'm doing everything
I've done in my life is in the pursuit of knowledge and trying to understand the world
around us.”
Advertisement
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 5 of 16

--- PAGE 6 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
Photograph by David Vintiner for TIME
Order your copy of the 2025 TIME100 issue here
Read More: DeepMind’s CEO Helped Take AI Mainstream. Now He’s Urging Caution
In an AI industry whose top ranks are populated mostly by businessmen and
technologists, that identity sets Hassabis apart. Yet he must still operate in a system
where market logic is the driving force. Creating AGI will require hundreds of billions
of dollars’ worth of investments—dollars that Google is happily plowing into
Hassabis’ DeepMind unit, buoyed by the promise of a technology that can do
anything and everything. Whether Google will ensure that AGI, if it comes, benefits
the world remains to be seen; Hassabis points to the decision to release AlphaFold
for free as a symbol of its benevolent posture. But Google is also a company that
must legally act in the best interests of its shareholders, and consistently releasing
expensive tools for free is not a long-term profitable strategy. The financial promise
of AI—for Google and for its competitors—lies in controlling a technology capable of
automating much of the labor that drives the more than $100 trillion global
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 6 of 16

--- PAGE 7 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
economy. Capture even a small fraction of that value, and your company will
become one of the most profitable the world has ever seen. Good news for
shareholders, but bad news for regular workers who may find themselves suddenly
unemployed.
Advertisement
So far, Hassabis has successfully steered Google's multibillion-dollar AI ambitions
toward the type of future he wants to see: one focused on scientific discoveries
that, he hopes, will lead to radical social uplift. But will this former child chess
prodigy be able to maintain his scientific idealism as AI reaches its high-stakes
endgame? His track record reveals one reason to be skeptical.
When DeepMind was acquired by Google in 2014, Hassabis insisted on a contractual
firewall: a clause explicitly prohibiting his technology from being used for military
applications. It was a red line that reflected his vision of AI as humanity's scientific
savior, not a weapon of war. But multiple corporate restructures later, that
protection has quietly disappeared. Today, the same AI systems developed under
Hassabis's watch are being sold, via Google, to militaries such as Israel's—whose
campaign in Gaza has killed tens of thousands of civilians. When pressed, Hassabis
denies that this was a compromise made in order to maintain his access to Google's
computing power and thus realize his dream of developing AGI. Instead, he frames
it as a pragmatic response to geopolitical reality, saying DeepMind changed its
stance after acknowledging that the world had become “a much more dangerous
place” in the last decade. “I think we can't take for granted anymore that democratic
values are going to win out,” he says. Whether or not this justification is honest, it
raises an uncomfortable question: If Hassabis couldn't maintain his ethical red line
when AGI was just a distant promise, what compromises might he make when it
comes within touching distance?
Advertisement
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 7 of 16

--- PAGE 8 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
To get to Hassabis’s dream of a utopian future, the AI industry must first navigate its
way through a dark forest full of monsters. Artificial intelligence is a dual-use
technology like nuclear energy: it can be used for good, but it could also be terribly
destructive. Hassabis spends much of his time worrying about risks, which generally
fall into two different buckets. One is the possibility of systems that can
meaningfully enhance the capabilities of bad actors to wreak havoc in the world; for
example, by endowing rogue nations or terrorists with the tools they need to
synthesize a deadly virus. Preventing risks like that, Hassabis believes, means
carefully testing AI models for dangerous capabilities, and only gradually releasing
them to more users with effective guardrails. It means keeping the “weights” of the
most powerful models (essentially their underlying neural networks) out of the
public’s hands altogether, so that models can be withdrawn from public use if
dangers are discovered after release. That’s a safety strategy that Google follows but
which some of its competitors, such as DeepSeek and Meta, do not.
Advertisement
The second category of risks may seem like science fiction, but they are taken
seriously inside the AI industry as model capabilities advance. These are the risks of
AI systems acting autonomously— such as a chatbot deceiving its human creators,
or a robot attacking the person it was designed to help. Language models like
DeepMind’s Gemini are essentially grown from the ground up, rather than written by
hand like old-school computer programs, and so computer scientists and users are
constantly finding ways to elicit new behaviors from what are best understood as
incredibly mysterious and complex artifacts. The question of how to ensure that
they always behave and act in ways that are “aligned” to human values is an
unsolved scientific problem. Early signs of misaligned behaviors, like strategic lying,
have already been identified by researchers working with today’s language models.
Those problems are only likely to become more acute as models get better. “How
do we ensure that we can stay in charge of those systems, control them, interpret
what they're doing, understand them, and put the right guardrails in place that are
not movable by very highly capable self-improving systems?” Hassabis says. “That is
an extremely di$icult challenge.”
Advertisement
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 8 of 16

--- PAGE 9 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
It’s a devilish technical problem—but what really keeps Hassabis up at night are the
political coordination challenges that accompany it. Even if well-meaning
companies can make safe AIs, that doesn’t by itself stop the creation and
proliferation of unsafe AIs. Stopping that will require international collaboration—
something that’s becoming increasingly di$icult as western alliances fray and
geopolitical tensions between the U.S. and China rise. Hassabis has played a
significant role in the three AI summits held by global governments since 2023, and
says he would like to see more of that kind of cooperation. He says the U.S.
government’s export controls on AI chips, intended to prevent China’s AI industry
from surpassing Silicon Valley, are “fine”—but he would prefer to avoid political
choices that “end up in an antagonistic kind of situation.”
He might be out of luck. As both the U.S. and China have woken up in recent years
to the potential power of AGI, the climate of global cooperation —which reached a
high watermark with the first AI Safety Summit in 2023—has given way to a new kind
of realpolitik. In this new era, with nations racing to militarize AI systems and build
up stockpiles of chips, and with a new cold war brewing between the U.S. and
China, Hassabis still holds out hope that competing nations and companies can find
ways to set aside their differences and cooperate, at least on AI safety. “It’s in
everyone’s self-interest to make sure that goes well,” he says.
Advertisement
Even if the world can find a way to safely navigate through the geopolitical turmoil
of AGI’s arrival, the question of labor automation will rear its head. When
governments and companies no longer rely on humans to generate their wealth,
what leverage will citizens have left to demand the ingredients of democracy and a
comfortable life? AGI might create abundance, but it won’t dispel the incentives for
companies and states to amass resources and compete with rivals. Hassabis admits
he is better at forecasting technological futures than social and economic ones; he
says he wishes more economists would take the possibility of near-term AGI
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 9 of 16

--- PAGE 10 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
seriously. Still, he thinks it’s inevitable we’ll need a “new political philosophy” to
organize society in this world. Democracy, he says, “is not a panacea, by any
means,” and might have to give way to “something better.”
Hassabis, left, captaining the England under-11s chess team at the age of 9. Courtesy Demis Hassabis
Advertisement
Automation, meanwhile, is already on the horizon. In March, DeepMind announced
Gemini 2.5, the latest version of its flagship AI model, which outperforms rival
models made by OpenAI and Anthropic on many popular metrics. Hassabis is
currently hard at work on Project Astra, a DeepMind effort to build a universal digital
assistant powered by Gemini. That work, he says, is not intended to hasten labor
disruptions, but instead is about building the necessary scaffolding for the type of AI
that he hopes will one day make its own scientific discoveries. Still, as research into
these AI “agents” progresses, Hassabis says, expect them to be able to carry out
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 10 of 16

--- PAGE 11 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
increasingly more complex tasks independently. (An AI agent that can meaningfully
automate the job of further AI research, he predicts, is “a few years away.”) For the
first time, Google is also now using these digital brains to control robot bodies: in
March the company announced a Gemini-powered android robot that can carry out
embodied tasks like playing tic-tac-toe, or making its human a packed lunch. The
tone of the video announcing Gemini Robotics was friendly, but its connotations
were not lost on some YouTube commenters: “Nothing to worry [about,] humanity,
we are only developing robots to do tasks a 5 year old can do,” one wrote. “We are
not working on replacing humans or creating robot armies.”
Advertisement
Hassabis acknowledges the social impacts of AI are likely to be significant. People
must learn how to use new AI models, he says, in order to excel professionally in the
future and not risk getting left behind. But he is also confident that if we eventually
build AGI capable of doing productive labor and scientific research, the world that it
ushers into existence will be abundant enough to ensure a substantial increase in
quality of life for everybody. “In the limited-resource world which we're in, things
ultimately become zero-sum,” Hassabis says. “What I'm thinking about is a world
where it's not a zero-sum game anymore, at least from a resource perspective.”
Five months after his Nobel Prize, Hassabis’s journey from chess prodigy to Nobel
laureate now leads toward an uncertain future. The stakes are no longer just
scientific recognition—but potentially the fate of human civilization. As DeepMind's
machines grow more capable, as corporate and geopolitical competition over AI
intensifies, and as the economic impacts loom larger, Hassabis insists that we might
be on the cusp of an abundant economy that benefits everyone. But in a world
where AGI could bring unprecedented power to those who control it, the forces of
business, geopolitics, and technological power are all bearing down with increasing
pressure. If Hassabis is right, the turbulent decades of the early 21st century could
give way to a shining utopia. If he has miscalculated, the future could be darker than
anyone dares imagine. One thing is for sure: in his pursuit of AGI, Hassabis is playing
the highest-stakes game of his life.
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 11 of 16

--- PAGE 12 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
Must-Reads from TIME
SSSSeeeevvvveeeerrrraaaallll UUUU....SSSS....
CCCCaaaalllliiiiffffoooorrrrnnnniiiiaaaa
SSSSttttaaaatttteeeessss
MMMMaaaayyyyoooorrrr TTTThhhheeee SSSSlllleeeeeeeepppp
MMMMoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg
RRRReeeessssiiiiggggnnnnssss,,,, TTTTrrrriiiicccckkkk TTTThhhhaaaatttt
CCCCrrrruuuuiiiisssseeee
AAAAddddmmmmiiiittttttttiiiinnnngggg ttttoooo AAAAccccttttuuuuaaaallllllllyyyy
PPPPaaaasssssssseeeennnnggggeeeerrrrssss aaaassss
BBBBeeeeiiiinnnngggg aaaannnn QQQQuuuuiiiieeeettttssss aaaa
LLLLaaaatttteeeesssstttt
AAAAggggeeeennnntttt ffffoooorrrr RRRRaaaacccciiiinnnngggg MMMMiiiinnnndddd
HHHHaaaannnnttttaaaavvvviiiirrrruuuussss
CCCChhhhiiiinnnnaaaa
CCCCaaaasssseeee RRRReeeeppppoooorrrrtttteeeedddd
TTTThhhheeee PPPPeeeennnnttttaaaaggggoooonnnn
AAAA 2222000022226666 BBBBlllluuuueeee
JJJJuuuusssstttt RRRReeeelllleeeeaaaasssseeeedddd 11110000 MMMMeeeeaaaannnniiiinnnnggggffffuuuullll
WWWWaaaavvvveeee aaaassss BBBBiiiigggg aaaassss
OOOOvvvveeeerrrr aaaa TTTThhhhiiiinnnnggggssss ttttoooo TTTTeeeellllllll
tttthhhheeee OOOOnnnneeee iiiinnnn
HHHHuuuunnnnddddrrrreeeedddd UUUUFFFFOOOO YYYYoooouuuurrrr MMMMoooommmm
2222000000006666 NNNNoooo
FFFFiiiilllleeeessss.... HHHHeeeerrrreeee''''ssss WWWWhhhhiiiilllleeee YYYYoooouuuu SSSSttttiiiillllllll
LLLLoooonnnnggggeeeerrrr SSSSeeeeeeeemmmmssss
WWWWhhhhaaaatttt WWWWeeee CCCCaaaannnn
FFFFaaaarrrr----FFFFeeeettttcccchhhheeeedddd
FFFFoooouuuunnnndddd IIIInnnnssssiiiiddddeeee
This Ann Summers Toy Looks
Sweet But Knows Exactly Wha…
Ann Summers Is Filled With
Surprises... Free Delivery On Orde…
Ann Summers|Sponsored Shop Now
TV Presenter: I Drank Olive Oil
For A Month - I Had No Idea I…
Radiant Glow Secrets|Sponsored
Sarah Palin's Crew - TIME
The former screenwriter says she left
the GOP in 2006 because of Georg…
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 12 of 16

--- PAGE 13 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
TIME
Why This Tiny Silver Bird is
Becoming The Uk's Most…
Look Closer: The Genius Secret
Hidden In This Viral "Hope" Bird …
Glosritystore|Sponsored Learn More
The "Silverware Bird" Secret:
Why Thousands Are Buying T…
Look Closer: The Genius Secret
Hidden In This Viral "Hope" Bird …
Glosritystore|Sponsored Learn More
Top Dermatologists Say This
Gem Is "All You Need" To…
"My Skin Is Smooth And My Age …
Skincare|Sponsored Learn More
This overlooked vitamin soothes
nerve pain in 7 days
Nerve Research|Sponsored
Brits Could Find New Ways to
Earn Extra Income Thanks to…
North Vale G… |Sponsored Learn More
Sciatica Pain? Do This Tric…
UK Readers with sciatic nerve pain
are trying this 15-minute at-home …
Daily Trends … |Sponsored Learn More
California Mayor Resigns,…
Eileen Wang resigned as mayor of
…
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 13 of 16

--- PAGE 14 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
Arcadia Monday, as U.S. officials s…
TIME
A simple trick alleviates yea…
SB|Sponsored Learn More
Installers Agree: Solar Only Pays
Off in These UK Postcodes
Free solar panel quote.
UK Solar|Sponsored Learn More
The 3-Second Trick UK Car
Thieves Hate
Everyday drivers in Britain call this
the best car security upgrade in …
Motoring New…|Sponsored Read More
Catholic Leaders in U.S.…
But some MAGA Catholics say they …
TIME
3 Toxic Foods for Dogs: The
One Meat You Should Neve…
Your Pet Nutrition|Sponsored
Sections More About Us Your
Subscriptions
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 14 of 16

--- PAGE 15 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
Home The TIME Our
Vault Mission Subscribe
Politics
TIME Contact Access My
Health
Africa the Digital
Editors Magazine
AI
TIME
France Press Manage My
World
Room Subscription
TIME For
Business
Kids Media Kit Global
Help
Science
TIME Reprints &
Center
Futures Permissions
Climate
Buy an
TIME Masthead
Issue
Ideas
Studios
Careers
Shop the
Entertainment
Video
Cover
Site Map
Sports Store
Red
Modern
Border
Technology Give a Gift
Slavery
Supplied Statement
Newsletters
Partner
Content
© 2026 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms
of Service, Privacy Policy (Your Privacy Rights) and Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
.
TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers
may be subject to change without notice.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 15 of 16

--- PAGE 16 ---
Demis Hassabis' TIME100 on AlphaFold, AGI, and humanity. 13/05/2026, 08:35
https://time.com/7277608/demis-hassabis-interview-time100-2025/ Page 16 of 16
