
--- PAGE 1 ---
CerebralCortexAugust2014;24:1979–1987
doi:10.1093/cercor/bht042
AdvanceAccesspublicationMarch5,2013
Imagine All the People: How the Brain Creates and Uses Personality Models
to Predict Behavior
DemisHassabis1,*,R.NathanSpreng2,*,AndreiA.Rusu3,CliffordA.Robbins4,RaymondA.Mar5andDanielL.Schacter4
1GatsbyComputationalNeuroscienceUnit,UniversityCollegeLondon,LondonWC1N3AR,UK,2LaboratoryofBrainand
Cognition,DepartmentofHumanDevelopment,CornellUniversity,Ithaca,NY14853,USA,3DepartmentofComputerScience,
VrijeUniversiteit,Amsterdam,TheNetherlands,4DepartmentofPsychology,HarvardUniversity,Cambridge,MA02138,USA
and5DepartmentofPsychology,YorkUniversity,Toronto,ON,CanadaM3J1P3
*Boththeauthorscontributedequallytothiswork.
Addresscorrespondenceto:R.N.Spreng,LaboratoryofBrainandCognition,DepartmentofHumanDevelopment,CornellUniversity,Ithaca,NY
14853,USA.Email:nathan.spreng@gmail.com
The behaviors of other people are often central to envisioning the Wepropose that, whenpredicting or imagining the behav-
future. The ability to accurately predict the thoughts and actions ior of others based on their personality, the brain is likely to
of others is essential for successful social interactions, with far- relyonthesamenetworkofregionsthatsupportotherforms
reaching consequences. Despite its importance, little is known ofmentalsimulation,suchasrememberingthepastandplan-
abouthowthebrainrepresentspeopleinordertopredictbehavior. ning for the future (Buckner and Carroll 2007; Hassabis and
In this functional magnetic resonance imaging study, participants Maguire2007;Schacteretal.2007,2008,2012).Becauseauto-
learnedthe uniquepersonalityof4 protagonists and imaginedhow biographical memories and future plans are both character-
eachwouldbehaveindifferentscenarios.Theprotagonists’person- ized by social events (Larocque and Oatley 2006), social
alities were composedof2 traits: AgreeablenessandExtraversion. information is a key component of event simulation (Spreng
Which protagonist was being imagined was accurately inferred et al. 2009). Both planned and remembered events often
based solely on activity patterns in the medial prefrontal cortex involve the presence of other people, their thoughts, and
using multivariate pattern classification, providing novel evidence their behaviors. Autobiographical recollection (remembering
that brain activity can reveal whom someone is thinking about. the past) involves reconstructing the spatial, temporal, and
Lateral temporal and posterior cingulate cortex discriminated oftensocialelementsfromapasteventinone’slife.Thisform
between different degrees of agreeableness and extraversion, ofmentalsimulationislikelylinkedtopersonalitymodels,as
respectively. Functional connectivity analysis confirmed that itisthroughpreviousexperienceswithothersthatonelearns
regions associated with trait-processing and individual identities of their personality traits. These traits are then combined to
werefunctionallycoupled.Activityduringtheimaginationtask,and build a model of that person’s overall personality. However,
revealedbyfunctionalconnectivity,wasconsistentwiththedefault predicting the future behavior of others differs from remem-
network. Our results suggest that distinct regions code for person- bering in that it involves mentally simulated events that have
ality traits, and that the brain combines these traits to represent yet to occur. This feature makes predicting behavior more
individuals. The brain then usesthis “personality model” to predict akin to simulating a future event. Nevertheless, future event
thebehaviorofothersinnovelsituations. simulation engages many of the same core processes as re-
membering(BucknerandCarroll2007;HassabisandMaguire
Keywords:defaultmodenetwork,fMRI,MVPA,personalitytraits, 2007; Schacteret al. 2007, 2008, 2012). This overlap includes
simulation,socialneuroscience the shared need to construct a scene, generating and main-
tainingaspatialcontextwithinwhichthefutureorpastevent
unfolds (Hassabis and Maguire 2007; Hassabis, Kumaran,
Introduction Maguire 2007; Hassabis, Kumaran, Vann, et al. 2007). We
Akeyaspecttosuccessfullynavigatingthesocialworldisthe would therefore expect these same core regions to be acti-
ability to predict how people will behave in different situ- vatedwhenpredictingsomeone’sbehavior,assceneconstruc-
ations. Individual differences in behavior can be predicted tion is also required for mental simulating how someone
from an individual’s personality traits, which encompass might behave. These core areas include the posterior cingu-
broadcognitiveandbehavioraltendencies(CostaandMcCrae latecortex(pCC),themedialtemporallobes(MTLs),thepos-
1992; Roberts et al. 2007; Fleeson and Gallagher 2009). To terior inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and ventral medial
makeaccuratepredictions,apreciserepresentationofanindi- prefrontal cortex (mPFC) (Hassabis, Kumaran, Maguire 2007;
vidual’s personality traits must be created and this is known Hassabis, Kumaran, Vann, et al. 2007; Andrews-Hanna et al.
as a personality model (Park 1986; Park et al. 1994). Studies 2010),allcomponentsofthedefaultnetwork.
have shownthat personalitymodelscanbequiteaccurate.In Boththeconstructionandapplicationofpersonalitymodels
fact, close friends are as accurate at predicting each other’s are a key component of social processing, because these
daily behavior as they are at predicting their own behavior models are essential for predicting and comprehending the
(Vazire and Mehl 2008). Although there is a growing under- behaviorofothers.Identifyingtraittendenciesinothersrelies
standingofhowanindividual’spersonalityistiedtothestruc- onanabilitytoaccuratelyreadandinterpretsocialcues,then
ture and function of his or her own brain (DeYoung 2010), linking these to broadercognitive and behavioral tendencies.
little is known about how the personalities of other people Themajorityofresearchontheneuroscienceofsocialproces-
arerepresentedinordertopredictbehavior. singhasfocusedontheabilitytoinferthemomentarymental
©TheAuthor2013.PublishedbyOxfordUniversityPress.Allrightsreserved.
ForPermissions,pleasee-mail:journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 2 ---
statesofothers,oftenreferredtoasmentalizing(Premackand eventforvividnessandconfidenceinportrayingtheprotagonist
Woodruff 1978; Carruthers and Smith 1996; Frith and Frith accurately.Twoadditionalcontrolconditionsfollowedasimilar
2003). Currently, little is known about how the brain rep- format: (1) a “Self” condition where the participants imagined
resentsthebroadcognitiveandbehavioraltendenciesofother themselves as the main character, and (2) an “Empty Scene”
people, beyond momentary mental inferences. Based on past condition, which involved simulating just the spatial scene,
work,itappearsthatregionswithinthemPFCareinvolvedin devoidofpeopleandevents.Afinalbaselineconditioninvolved
makingtraitinferencesaboutothers(Harrisetal.2005;Mitch- counting the number of syllables in the text cue (the “Count”
elletal.2006;Maetal.2011,2012;Wagneretal.2012).What condition)yielding84trialsinall(7conditions×12trials).
is not known is how the brain models personality and how Toassesstheengagementofthedefaultnetworkacrossthe
thesepersonalitymodelsareemployedtopredictthebehavior 3 imagination tasks, we compared these conditions to the
ofothers.Unlikethetransientnatureofmentalstates,person- baseline syllable Count condition. To examine how the brain
ality traits are more enduring and generalize across time and generates and applies personality models, we compared the
situations.Moreover,ourmodelsofaperson’spersonalityare SelfandProtagonistconditions withthe EmptyScenecontrol
far more flexible and have broader utility. For example, per- condition.Thiscomparisonallowedustoisolatetheinterper-
sonality models allow us to make predictions about people sonal components of imagining an event from scene-
whoarenotcurrentlypresent,ortopredictaperson’sreaction construction processes (Hassabis and Maguire 2007). More-
toanentirelynovelscenario.Wecanalsoconstructpersonality over, to determine whether the brain represents unique per-
models based on second-hand information, allowing us to sonality profiles with different brain areas, we employed
makepredictionsaboutindividualswehaveonlyheardabout. multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) (Haynes and Rees 2006;
Itremainsunknownhowthebrainconstructsandappliesper- Norman et al. 2006). Doing so allowed us to determine
sonality models, and what role the default network may play whether spatially localized brain activity was reliable enough
intheseprocesses. acrossindividualstoinferwhoisbeingthoughtabout,based
To address these questions, we employed functional mag- solely on the pattern of brain activation. An additional func-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) to scan participants while tional connectivity analysis provided further clues as to how
they imagined short events, each involving 1 of 4 possible personality information is integrated in order to produce a
protagonistswithdistinctpersonalitytraits,inavarietyoffic- model for behavioral predictions. Taken together, our results
tional situations. Prior to scanning, participants learned the reveal the role of the default network in the representation
distinct personalities of the protagonists using a “thin slice” and integration of social and personality information when
approach(Borkenauetal.2004).Participantswerepresented predictingthefuturebehaviorofotherpeople.
withprofilesfor4ostensiblyrealpeople,whichincludedthat
person’s name,a photographoftheir face, and12 statements
about their personality; order was counterbalanced across MaterialsandMethods
participants. The 12 statements were created by modifying
the items from 2 “Big Five” personality trait questionnaires Participants
Participants were 19 healthy right-handed young adults (10 females;
(Costa and McCrae 1992; DeYoung et al. 2007). In this study,
mean age=21.4±3.2 years) who gave written informed consent in
we focused on 2 of the 5 main personality traits: Agreeable-
accordancewiththeHarvardInstitutionalReviewBoard.
ness and Extraversion. Agreeableness reflects a tendency
towardaltruism,cooperation,andavaluingofharmonyinin-
terpersonalrelationshipsas opposed toantisocial andexploi- PrescanTraining
tative behaviors (Costa and McCrae 1992). Extraversion, on
ProtagonistTraining theotherhand,reflectsatendencytowardthedisplayofposi-
Participants learned the 4 protagonists’ personalities prior to scan-
tive emotions and social affiliation as opposed to social with- ning,throughacombinationoftrainingandtestingforbothcompre-
drawal and reserve (Costa and McCrae 1992). We selected hensionandrecall(LandauerandBjork1978;RoedigerandKarpicke
agreeableness and extraversion, because these traits are 2006). Participants were introduced to each of the protagonists on
rotatedvariantsofthemajoraxesoftheinterpersonalcircum- paper. They were informed that the experimenters knew quite a lot
about the 4 individuals, derived from interviews with them, their
plex.Thesetraitsthereforecaptureabroadspectrumofsocial
friends,andfamily.Participantsweretoldthattheywouldbegivena
behaviors and tendencies (e.g., McCrae and Costa 1989;
little bit of information about each individual, and that the exper-
DeYoung etal.2012). The 4protagonists wereeitherhighor imenters were interested in seeing how well the participant could
lowonthese2dimensions,producinga2×2factorialdesign predicthowtheindividualswouldbehavebasedonthatinformation.
(Fig. 1A). After training, participants were capable of recog- Protagonists were gender matched to the participant. Common
nizing each protagonist and verbally describing that individ- popularnamesfortheprotagonistswereselectedfromtheUSsocial
ual’s personality. Participants were then asked to vividly securitywebsite(http://www.ssa.gov/cgi-bin/namesbystate.cgi)listof
thetop10most popular namesgiventochildrenborninMassachu-
imagine and to describe 12 novel locations for later recall in setts in 1990. Men’s names were Mike, Chris, Dave, and Nick.
thescanner(e.g.,abar,restaurant,bank;Hassabis,Kumaran, Women’snameswereAshley,Sarah,Nicole,andJenny.Noparticipant
Maguire2007;Hassabis,Kumaran,Vann,etal.2007). sharedthesamenameastheprotagonist.Eachnamewaspairedwith
In the subsequent scanning session, 12 text cues were pre- 12personalitystatements,6relatedtoagreeablenessand6relatedto
sented,eachdescribingashorteventinvolvingoneoftheprota- extraversion, from items of the Big Five Aspect Scales (DeYoung
gonistsinapreimaginedlocation(“Protagonist”conditions).For 2010) and the Revised Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Personal-
example:“Inabar—someonespillstheirdrink—Dave.”Partici- ity Inventory (Costa and McCrae 1992). Personality statements for
agreeableness included statements worded positively (e.g., “Likes to
pantswereinstructedtomentallyplayoutthese“vignettes”over
cooperatewithothers”)andnegatively(e.g.“Canbecoldandaloof”).
a 10-s period, concentrating on the actions, thoughts, and feel- Likewise,statementsforextraversionwerebothpositiveandnegative
ings of the protagonist. Participants then rated the imagined (e.g., “Is outgoing, sociable”; “Is sometimes shy, inhibited”). While
1980 PredictingBehaviorUsingPersonalityModels (cid:129) Hassabisetal.
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 3 ---
Figure1. Studydesign.(A)Thepersonalities ofthe4protagonistswere variedhighlowon2 traitdimensions,extraversionandagreeableness, tocreatea2×2factorial
relationshipbetweenthe4personalities.(B)Timelineshowingtheexperimentaldesignofasingletrial.Thetextinstructioncueispresentedfor5scontainingthelocationand
vignette information. The name of the protagonist isthen displayed (“Dave” in this example trial), and the participant imaginesthat event happeningto that person in that
locationfor10s.Finally,participantsgivefeedbackontheirimaginedeventsviavividnessandaccuracyratingsfollowedbyarestperiod.
looking at the 12 statements, photograph, and name, participants mental simulation period (10s); vividness and confidence ratings
rated 18 items about each protagonist, 1 protagonist at a time, as (7.5s);andarestperiod(2.5s).DuringtheCountcondition,thefol-
either true or false (72 items in total; e.g. “Likes the idea of being lowinginformationwasdisplayed:Atextcue(5s);acountingperiod
givenasurpriseparty,TRUEorFALSE”).Participantswerethengiven allowing the participant to determine the numberof syllables in the
the opportunity to study the 12 statements prior to a free recall test verbal information (10s); a question regarding whether the number
wherethe12statementswouldbeinaccessible.Oneatatime,partici- of syllables was even orodd and a confidence rating for their judg-
pants were then instructed to “Describe your general thoughts and ment(7.5s);andfollowedbyarestperiod(2.5s).Thetrialorderwas
impressions of this individual in 3–4 sentences.” Order of presen- counterbalanced across participants, with no 2 adjacent trials invol-
tation, as well as personality, name, and photograph pairings, was vingeitherthesamelocationorthesamecondition.Trialswithvivid-
randomizedacrossparticipants. ness and confidence scores over 3 (on the 5-point scale) were
retainedforsubsequentfMRIanalysis.Thenumberoftrialspercon-
dition were M(self)=10.1±2.7; M(high extra–high agree)=9.6±2.8;
ImaginingScenesTraining M(high extra–low agree)=9.5±2.8; M(low extra–high agree)=9.4±
Participantswerethenaskedtovividlyimagine12commoneveryday 3.0; M(low extra–low agree)=8.4±3.1; and M(empty room)=10.0±
locationssuchasabar,restaurant,orbank,andtodescribethemin 2.8. Two additional conditions involving trait judgments were con-
asmuchdetailaspossible(Hassabis,Kumaran,Maguire2007;Hassa- ducted, but are not germane to the current aims and are thus not
bis,Kumaran,Vann,etal.2007).Theywereexplicitlytoldnottogive reported.
anactualmemoryofarealplace(oranypartofone),buttoinstead
constructsomethingentirelynovel.Theywereinformedthatinstruc-
tions to reimagine these locations would appear multiple times ImageAcquisition
during the scanning session, and that each time in response they Brain imaging data were acquired at the Harvard Center for Brain
wererequiredtoalwaysthinkoftheexactsamelocationascloselyas Sciencewith a 3-T Siemens TimTrio MRI scanner with a 12-channel
possible. These types of imagination tasks exemplify mental simu- headcoil.AnatomicalscanswereacquiredusingaT 1 -weightedmulti-
lation(Hassabis,Kumaran,Maguire2007;Hassabis,Kumaran,Vann, echo volumetric MRI (time repetition [TR]=2530ms; time echos
et al. 2007). Unlike autobiographical recollection, imagined events [TE’s]=1.64, 3.5, 5.36, 7.22ms; 7° flip angle; 1-mm voxel). Two
canbeexperimentallymanipulatedandsystematized.Allparticipants 30min 20s blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) functional scans
imagine the same scenarios and can do so multiple times, and the were acquired with a T 2 *-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) pulse
contentcanbetightlycontrolled(Hassabis,Kumaran,Maguire2007; sequence (TR=2500; TE=30ms; 85° flip angle; 39 axial slices;
Hassabis,Kumaran,Vann,etal.2007;Addisetal.2009). 3×3×3mmvoxels).
Immediatelypriortoscanning,participantswerepresentedwitha
photograph for each protagonist and required to state the person’s fMRIAnalysis
nameand3wordsdescribingthatperson’spersonality.Followingthe
scan, participants were shown the photos and again asked to name PartialLeastSquaresPreprocessingandAnalysis
the person and provide 3 words to describe his or her personality; Forthe5pairwisecontrastsandfunctionalconnectivityanalysis,fMRI
this process ensured the stability of the personality representation data were subjected to standard preprocessing steps and analyzed
throughout the scanning interval. Participants also recounted the withpartialleastsquares(PLS;McIntosh1999;Krishnanetal.2011).
content of their imagined event for 2 randomly selected scenes for fMRIdatawerepreprocessedusingSPM2(WellcomeTrustCenterfor
eachofthe4protagonists,aswellastheself;thisprocedureallowed Neuroimaging, London, UK). The first 4 volumes in each run were
ustoconfirmtaskcompliance.
excluded from analyses to allow for T -equilibration effects. Data
1
were corrected for slice-dependent time shifts and for head motion
within and across runs using a rigid-body correction. Images were
TaskandProcedure then spatially normalized to the standard space of the Montreal
During the scanning session, participants were presented with text Neurological Institute (MNI) atlas. The volumetric time series was
cues describing a short event unfolding in each of the preimagined then spatially smoothed with a 6-mm full-width at half-maximum
locations,with1ofthe4peoplenamedasthemainprotagonist.For (FWHM)Gaussiankernelresultingin4-mmcubicvoxels.Allcoordi-
example: “in the street—sees a homeless vet asking for change— natesarereportedinMNIspace.
Sarah.” Participants were instructed to mentally playout 12 of these PLS was utilized to examine BOLD signal changes at the group
vignettes,eachlastingthedurationofa10-speriod,concentratingon level.Themethodissensitivetocovarianceinvoxelresponseassoci-
the actions, thoughts, and feelings of the protagonist. Participants atedwithtasks,makingitwellsuitedtostudydistributedpatternsof
then rated the imagined event for vividness and confidence in accu- activity.Additionally,PLSisimpervioustoscannerdrift.Thiswases-
rately portraying the protagonist, both on a scale of 1–5. Each trial sential as the longer runs needed for optimal MVPA analyses that
lasted25s,consistingof:Atextcuecontaininginformationregarding exacerbated the potential for scanner drift. For the current analysis,
thelocation,event,andprotagonist(or“Self”or“Empty”cue)(5s);a weusedthenonrotatedversionoftaskspatiotemporalPLS(ST-PLS),
CerebralCortexAugust2014,V24N8 1981
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 4 ---
enabling usto specify a priori nonorthogonal contrasts (as opposed
Table1
to the data-driven version of rotated ST—PLS that identifies orthog-
Behavioralresults
onal latent variables). Five pairwise sets of contrasts were specified.
Priortoanalysis,activityateachtimepoint,relativetotrialonset,for Vividness Confidence
eachvoxelisaveragedacrosstrialsofagivenconditionandnormal-
izedtoactivityinthefirstTRofthetrial.Thedatamatrixisthenex- Mean SD Mean SD
pressed as voxel-by-voxel deviation from the grand mean acrossthe Highextraversion–highagreeableness 4.22 0.45 4.52 0.33
entire experiment. This matrix is analyzed with singular value Highextraversion–lowagreeableness 4.07 0.39 4.28 0.46
Lowextraversion–highagreeableness 4.17 0.53 4.36 0.46
decomposition to derive the contrast effects in the data. Here, we
Lowextraversion–lowagreeableness 4.00 0.50 4.19 0.60
applied PLS analysis to event-related fMRI data, and the results Allprotagonists 4.11 0.37 4.34 0.39
provideasetofbrainregionswhereinactivityisreliablyrelatedtothe Self 4.34 0.33 4.61 0.29
task conditions at 8 poststimulus time points. Each voxel is given a Emptyscene 4.34 0.46 — —
singularvalueweight,knownasasalience,whichisproportionalto
thecovarianceofactivitywiththetaskcontrastateachtimepointfor
mapsforeachparticipantwerethennormalizedtotheMNIspaceand
thecontrast.The significanceof each contrast as awholewas deter-
smoothed with a 3-dimensional Gaussian kernel (cut at edges), to
minedbypermutationtesting,using500permutations.Thisanalysis
compensate for errors in normalization. Since optimal levels of
was accomplished by randomly reassigning the order of the con- smoothing can only be determined empirically (Hopfinger et al.
ditionsforeachparticipant.PLSisrecalculatedforeachpermutation
2000), several levels of smoothing may be used to analyze the data
sample, and the frequency with which the permuted singular value
(Worsleyetal.1996).Inthiscase,weused11-mmFWHMforthepro-
exceedstheobservedsingularvaluesisdeterminedandexpressedas
tagonistandagreeablenessconditions,anda16-mmFWHMforextra-
a probability. All task contrasts were significant at P=0.002. In a
version.Atasecond-levelanalysis,voxel-wiset-valueswerecomputed
second,independentstep,thereliabilityofthesaliencesforthebrain acrosstheseindividualsubjectaccuracymaps,yielding afinal group
voxelsacrosssubjectswasdeterminedbybootstrapresampling,using level “information heatmap”, which illustrates the brain regions that
100iterations,toestimatethestandarderrorsforeachvoxel.Clusters carrysufficientinformationtodiscriminatebetweenconditions.
>100mm3comprisingvoxelswitharatioofthesaliencetotheboot-
Weestablishedthestatisticalsignificanceofourfindingsusingthe
strap standard error values (i.e., the “bootstrap ratio”; BSR) >3
standardapproachofpermutationtesting(NicholsandHolmes2002).
(P<0.005) were reported. The local maximum for each cluster was Foreachclassificationproblem,thewholeproceduredescribedabove
definedasthevoxelwithaBSRhigherthananyothervoxelina2-cm
was repeated 20timesbut withrandompermutations ofclasslabels
cube centered on that voxel. PLS identifies whole-brain patterns of
forthetrials,andthemaximumt-valueinthewholebraincomputed.
activityinasingleanalyticstepand,thus,nocorrectionformultiple
Then in accordance with standard practice (Nichols and Holmes
comparisonsisrequired.Althoughmostofthebrainregionsshowed
2002), the 0.95-quantile of this maximum t-statistic sample obtained
reliableactivationsacrossmultipletimepoints,wereporttheBSRfor from the permutation testing was selected as the significance
the third TR (i.e., 7.5s after the name appeared on the screen) as a
threshold. The corresponding t-value map (computed with correct
representativeindexofbrainactivityintime.
trial labels) was cut off below that value (t-value thresholds: 4.28,
The functional connectivity analysis was performed using “seed” 2.82, 3.32 for agreeableness, extraversion, and protagonists classifi-
PLS, a multivariate task-related functional connectivity analysis tech- cations,respectively) yielding resultssignificant at P<0.05 corrected
nique used to investigate the relationship between the activity of a
formultiplecomparisons.
seed region and the activity in the rest of the brain (McIntosh1999;
Krishnanetal.2011).WeusedtheBOLDsignalinthemPFC(0,50,
22)derivedfromtheMVPAanalysis,asseeds.Wethenassessedthe
task-related functional connectivity with the rest of the brain during Results
thesimulationofeachofthe4protagonistswithinthesameanalysis.
Individually defined seed activity from the peak activation and 26 BehavioralData
neighboringvoxelsinthethirdTRwascorrelatedwithactivityinall Overall, participants’ vividness and confidence ratings were
brain voxels, across participants. This matrix was then analyzed as
above.MeanBSRvaluesfromthepeakpersonalityclassifieranalyses high(averageratings>4of5;fordetails,seeTable1),indicat-
in lateral temporal cortex (LTC) (−60, −34, −17), dorsal mPFC (−3, ing task compliance. The assessment of vividness ratings
41,49),andpCC(−6,−49,31),includingthe26neighboringvoxels, when imagining the 4 protagonists, the self, and the empty
wereusedtoassessthesignificanceofconnectivitywiththeseeds. roomrevealedasignificantmaineffect (F =3.87,P<0.05).
5,14
However, no pairwise differences were observed when cor-
MVPAPreprocessingandAnalysis recting for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni correction,
The first 4 volumes were excluded from analysis to allow for T α<0.05). The trend was toward a significant difference in
1-
-equilibrationeffects.UsingSPM8,theremainingvolumesforindivid- vividnessbetweentheselfconditionandthe2lowagreeable-
ualsubjectswererealignedtothemean,resliced,andsmoothedwith ness protagonists. There was a statistically significant differ-
an 8-mm FWHM kernel, and the first 5s of each trial were selected ence in confidence ratings for how the participants and 4
forfurtheranalysis.Eachtrialwasmodeledwithaseparateregressor
protagonists would act (F =5.16, P<0.01). Participants’
asaboxcarfunctionandconvolvedwiththecanonicalhemodynamic 4,15
response function. A high-pass filter with a cutoff of 128s was em- confidence in imagining their own behavior was higher than
ployed.Modelestimationresultedina“betamap”foreachtrial(Soon for the 2 low agreeableness protagonists (Bonferroni correc-
et al. 2008), which were then z-scored (Pereira et al. 2009) and tion, α<0.05). Importantly, however, no significant differ-
inputtedasthetrainingdatatotheclassifier.
ences were observed between the 4 protagonists. In
Subsequent analyses were performed using multivariate pattern
determiningwhetheranevenoroddnumberofsyllableswere
analysisinpython(PyMVPA)(Hankeetal.2009).Weusedawhole-
presented in the verbal material, participants performed at
brain“searchlight”MVPAapproach(Kriegeskorteetal.2006;Hassabis
better-than-chance levels (mean percent accuracy=60±16,
etal.2009),whichinvolvedsteppingvoxelbyvoxelthrougheachsub-
ject’sbrain,lookingatlocalizedpatternsofactivityinsmallspherical onesamplet
(18)
=2.55,P<0.05).
arrays of voxels(radius=3 voxels)to yield an “accuracy”map. Stan-
dard linear Support Vector Machines (“libsvm” backend; Chang and
NeuroimagingData
Lin 2011) were trained (with the cost parameter C set to 1) using a
leave-one-out cross-validation procedure to produce accuracy esti-
Toconfirmtheengagementofthedefaultnetworkacrossthe
mates across the brain (Pereira et al. 2009). The resulting accuracy 3 imagination tasks, we compared these conditions to the
1982 PredictingBehaviorUsingPersonalityModels (cid:129) Hassabisetal.
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 5 ---
syllablecountingtask,inwhichparticipantsonlyengagedthe high and low agreeableness. Protagonists with high and low
surface features of verbally presented information. In 3 pair- extraversion were discriminated by differences in pCC
wise contrasts, imagining the protagonists, the self, and an response (Fig. 3B). To locate where identity information for
emptyscenewerecomparedwiththisbaselinecondition.The the protagonists was represented, a 4-way classification was
imaginationtaskswereallassociatedwithanincreasedBOLD performed to discriminate between the 4 protagonists. Clus-
signal in default network regions, including the mPFC, pCC, tersinanterioranddorsalmPFC(superiortothatobservedfor
MTL, LTC, temporal pole, IPL, and the superior and inferior agreeableness) reliably discriminated between the 4 protago-
frontal gyri (Fig. 2A–C, Supplementary Table 1). This pattern nists (Fig. 3C). Different personality models are therefore
of activity is consistent with the activity observed when associated with unique and detectable patterns of brain
constructing a scene (Hassabis, Kumaran, Maguire 2007; activityinthemPFC.Inotherwords,basedonbrainactivation
Hassabis,Kumaran,Vann,etal.2007)andimaginingpossible patterns alone, wewere able to infer which of the 4 protago-
futureevents(Schacteretal.2007,2012). niststheparticipantswereimagining.
Next, we parsed out the individual contributions of spatial Finally, we sought to evaluate the hypothesis that anterior
and social processing to default network activity by conduct- mPFC assembles and updates the models of other people’s
ing2contrasts:(A)imaginingtheprotagonists>imaginingan personality traits processed by the LTC, dorsal mPFC, and
empty scene without people, and (B) imagining oneself> pCC. To evaluate this hypothesis further, we conducted a
imagining an empty scene. Relative to imagining an empty functional connectivity analysis to determine whether the
scene,thecontrastsforimaginingtheprotagonistsandtheself anterior mPFC was functionally connected with the LTC, the
revealed regions in the ventral, dorsal, and anterior mPFC, dorsal mPFC, and the pCC during mental simulation of the 4
pCC,thetemporalpoles,andoccipitalcortex(Fig.2D,E,Sup- protagonists.Inthisanalysis,weassessedthetask-dependent
plementary Table 1). These brain regions are more engaged functionalconnectivityoftheanteriormPFCinthe4protago-
by social processing during the simulation of a social inter- nist conditions. Across all 4 protagonists, activity in the
action relative to those required to construct the scene. The anterior mPFC was significantly correlated with a distributed
contrastcomparingimaginingtheselfwithimaginingthepro- pattern of voxel response (Fig. 4). Functional connectivity
tagonistsrevealedgreateractivityinhippocampus,mPFC,and with the anterior mPFC was significant for the LTC (mean
otherregions(seeSupplementaryTable1andSupplementary BSR=3.5, P<0.001), dorsal mPFC (mean BSR=4.1,
Fig.1forfullresults).Nobrainregionsdemonstratedagreater P<0.001), and pCC (mean BSR=3.2, P<0.002). During ima-
BOLD response for imagining the protagonists relative to gined social simulations, the brain regions that code for per-
theself. sonality information are therefore functionally coupled with
Two key questions were then addressed: (A) Where in the the region that codes for individual identities. Further, mPFC
brain is the personality information for protagonists rep- connectivity also extended to the entire default network, in-
resented?and(B)whereisidentityinformationforeachofthe cludingtheIPL,retrosplenialcortex,andhippocampus(Fig.4
4protagonistsrepresented?Toanswerthesequestions,weuti- andSupplementaryTable1).
lizedMVPAtodeterminewhetherbrainregionscarriedinfor-
mation sufficient to discriminate between conditions. To GenderControlAnalysis
examine where personality information was represented, a Given gender differences in social behavior, we reanalyzed
2-wayclassificationwasperformedwithtrialsinvolvingprota- our data to assess the effect of gender on our results. In the
goniststhatsharedatrait (e.g.,highagreeableness)collapsed group analysis using PLS, brain activity for both gender
intoonecondition.WefoundclustersinthedorsalmPFCand groups covaried together, and there were no significant task
left LTC (Fig. 3A) that distinguished between protagonists of by gender interactions. For the MVPA, we used gender as a
Figure 2. Pairwise contrasts of the experimental conditions. (A) Self>Count; (B) Protagonists>Count; and (C) Empty Scene>Count all demonstrate default network
engagementacrosssimulationconditions.(D)Self>EmptySceneand(E)Protagonists>EmptySceneshowspecificactivityforsocialsimulations.Imagesaredisplayedfrom
TR3(7.5s)andthresholdedatP<0.005(PLSidentifieswhole-brainpatternsofactivityinasingleanalyticstepand,thus,nocorrectionformultiplecomparisonsisrequired).
SeeSupplementaryTable1forpeakcoordinates.
CerebralCortexAugust2014,V24N8 1983
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure3. MVPAresultsshowingsignificantvoxelsatthegrouplevelaftertheapplicationofwhole-brainsearchlightclassificationtechniques,overlaidonanaveragedstructural
image.(A)LeftLTCanddorsalmPFCdiscriminatebetweenprotagonistswithhighorlowagreeableness.(B)pCCdiscriminatesbetweenprotagonistswithhighorlowextraversion.
(C)mPFCdiscriminatesbetweenthe4protagonists.AllvoxelssignificantatP<0.05correctedformultiplecomparisons.SeeSupplementaryTable1forpeakcoordinates.
Figure 4. Functional connectivityanalysis. (A) Whole-brain pattern of functional connectivity with the mPFC seed region identified by the MVPA analysis as discriminating
betweenthe4protagonists.Seedregioniscircledinblue.Blackcirclesdesignatethatregionsidentifiedbythepersonalityclassificationarefunctionallyconnectedwiththe
mPFCregion.ResultsdisplayedfromTR3(7.5s)andthresholdedatP<0.005(PLSidentifieswhole-brainpatternsofactivityinasingleanalyticstepand,thus,nocorrection
formultiplecomparisonsisrequired).(B)BOLDsignalchange,relativetothetrialonset,forthe4protagonistconditions(errorbarsarethewithin-subjectSEM).(C)Correlation
betweenmPFCseedactivityandcompositemeasuresofthedistributedvoxel responseacrossthebrain(confidenceintervalswerederivedfrombootstrapresampling).See
SupplementaryTable1forpeakcoordinates.
1984 PredictingBehaviorUsingPersonalityModels (cid:129) Hassabisetal.
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 7 ---
covariateofnointerestinthesecond-levelanalysisandfound social and spatial aspects of mental simulation, we controlled
the same pattern of results. Next, we assessed whether there for scene construction to isolate the brain activity specific to
whereanyreliablewhole-braindifferencesintheregionsthat interpersonal imagining. After doing so, imagining social
discriminate between levels of agreeableness and extraver- elements was uniquely associated with the mPFC, pCC, and
sion, as well as the 4 protagonists. No significant patterns thetemporalpoles.Theseregionsarereliablyobservedduring
were observed. Although we recognize that there are many studiesofmentalinference(Mar2011)andareconsistentwith
reported gender differences in social cognition, we are unli- the observed overlap between autobiographical memory and
kely to have the statistical power to observe them in our mentalizing(Sprengetal.2009;Rabinetal.2010;Sprengand
currentsample. Grady 2010). They might also facilitate the integration of
personalandinterpersonalinformationforthestrategicuseof
socialconceptualknowledge(SprengandMar2012).Integrat-
Discussion
ing social knowledge could also support the generation of
Personality models describe broad cognitive and behavioral behavioralpredictionsbasedonpersonalitymodels.
tendencies, which are immensely useful for predicting how Event simulations consist of a rich spatial context within
peoplewillbehaveandreact. Thus,thesemodelsareessential whichcomplexsocialinteractionscantakeplace.Thesesimu-
for successful navigation of the social world. In this study, we lations reliablyengage the default network,with recentwork
examined how the brain constructs and applies personality exposing 2 core regions of the default network: mPFC and
models. Default network activity was observed across 3 pCC (Andrews-Hanna et al. 2010). Both of these regions are
imagination tasks (consistent with this network’s involvement densely interconnected with 2 distinct subsystems: (1) the
ininternallyfocusedthoughts;Andrews-Hanna2012),butsub- MTL subsystem, including the hippocampus, parahippocam-
regionsofthisnetworkweremoreinvolvedinsocialandinter- pus, restrosplenial cortex, the posterior IPL, and ventral
personal information processing. Our results also identified mPFC, and (2) the dorsal mPFC subsystem, including dorsal
specific brain regions where personality models are coded, as mPFC, LTC, the temporal parietal junction, and the temporal
well as where individual trait information is represented in pole (Andrews-Hanna et al. 2010). Generating the spatial
the brain. Connectivity analyses examined how protagonist context for an event simulation appears to be supported by
identityandtraitinformationinteract,orhowthebrainassoci- the MTL subsystem of the default network (Andrews-Hanna
ates specific personality traits with a given protagonist. These et al. 2010; i.e., the “scene construction” network, Hassabis
resultssuggestthatpersonalityinformationisintegratedinthe and Maguire 2007). Generating the social components of an
mPFC,producingamodelforbehavioralpredictions. event simulation, including the application of personality
A key question of interest was how personality models models, is supported by the core default structures and the
for different people are represented in the brain. Different dorsalmPFCsubsystem(Wagneretal.2012).Further,individ-
patterns of activation in the anterior mPFC could reliably ual regions of the dorsal mPFC subsystem differentially code
distinguishbetweenthedifferentpeoplewhosebehaviorwas for personality traits and the unique identityof other people.
being imagined. We hypothesize that this region is respon- During the process of simulation, these discrete regions are
sible for assembling and updating personality models. We functionallycoupledwitheachotherandtheMTLsubsystem,
thenexaminedhowthebrainrepresents2majortraits:Agree- withtheseassociationssuggestinganintegrationofsocialand
ablenessandextraversion.Agreeablenesswasassociatedwith personalityfeaturesintoaspatialcontext.
unique patterns of BOLD response in the dorsal mPFC and It has been suggested that mental simulations bestow an
LTC, whereas extraversion was associated with the pCC. adaptive advantage on humans by allowing them to prepare
These results provide a novel neuroscientific demonstration forupcomingsituations(Ingvar1979;Tayloretal.1998;Has-
that discriminable brain regions code for the specific person- sabis and Maguire 2007; Suddendorf and Corballis 2007;
ality traits of other people. Given the novelty of our obser- Schacter2012).Planningforsocialsituationsbyimaginingthe
vations, we encourage replication to increase confidence in likely behavior of others may be especially critical for the
these results. Notably, these brain regions are also reliably success of a highly social species, such as humans. Interest-
engagedwhenpeopleareinferringwhatapersonismomen- ingly, the anterior mPFC has been implicated in social cogni-
tarily thinking and feeling (Mar 2011) as well as when spon- tion disorders, such as autism (von dem Hagen et al.
taneous and intentional trait inferences are being made (Ma forthcoming), and our results point to a possible inability to
et al. 2011). During these moments, a subprocess may be build accurate personality models of others for those with
linking inferred mental states to broader personality traits. such disorders. Futurework in this direction should examine
This idea is consistent with past behavioral work, showing how models of others are constructed, how personality
that traits are rapidly and spontaneously inferred from beha- models are updated based on new information (Rapp and
viors(Ulemanetal.2008).Aswegettoknowapersonbetter, Gerrig2001),andhowdysfunctionmightbetreated.
individualpersonalitytraitsarecombinedtoformamoreholis-
tic representation of the person’s character—a personality
model—which can be used to imagine and therefore predict SupplementaryMaterial
the behavior and thoughts of individuals in hypothetical situ- Supplementary material can be found at: http://www.cercor.
ations.Aswehypothesized,thebrainregionsthatcodeforper- oxfordjournals.org/.
sonalitytraitswerefunctionallycoupledwiththemPFC,which
codesforindividualidentitiesduringmentalsimulation.
Funding
Mentally simulated events are often composed of both
social and spatial elements. To determine whether different This work was supported bya Wellcome Trust grant to D.H.,
components of the default network are associated with the NIHgrantMH060941toD.L.S.,andSSHRCgranttoRAM.
CerebralCortexAugust2014,V24N8 1985
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 8 ---
Notes Krishnan A, Williams LJ, McIntosh AR, Abdi H. 2011. Partial Least
Squares (PLS) methods for neuroimaging: a tutorial and review.
WethankJasonMitchellforsharingmentalinferencestatementsand
Neuroimage.56:455–475.
KarenSprengforcommentsonanearlierdraftofthismanuscriptand
Zoltan Szlavik for helpful analysis advice. Conflict of Interest: None Landauer TK, Bjork RA. 1978. Optimum rehearsal patterns and
namelearning.In: GrunebergMM,MorrisPE, SykesRN,editors.
declared.
Practical aspects of memory. New York: Academic Press. pp.
625–632.
LarocqueL,OatleyK.2006.Jointplans,emotions,andrelationships:
adiarystudyoferrors.JCulturEvolPsychol.4:245–265.
References MaN,VandekerckhoveM,VanHoeckN,VanOverwalleF.2012.Dis-
Addis DR, Pan L, Vu MA, Laiser N, Schacter DL. 2009. Constructive tinctrecruitmentoftemporo-parietaljunctionandmedialprefron-
episodicsimulationofthefutureandthepast:distinctsubsystems tal cortex in behavior understanding and trait identification. Soc
of a core brain network mediate imagining and remembering.
Neurosci.7:591–605.
Neuropsychologia.47:2222–2238. MaN,VandekerckhoveM,VanOverwalleF,SeurinckR,FiasW.2011.
Andrews-HannaJR.2012.Theadaptiveroleofthedefaultnetworkin Spontaneous and intentional trait inferences recruit a common
internalmentation.Neuroscientist.18:251–270. mentalizingnetworktoadifferentdegree:spontaneousinferences
Andrews-Hanna JR, Reidler JS, Sepulcre J, Poulin R, Buckner RL.
activateonlyitscoreareas.SocNeurosci.6:123–138.
2010. Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default MarRA.2011.Theneuralbasesofsocialcognitionandstorycompre-
network.Neuron.65:550–562. hension.AnnuRevPsychol.62:103–134.
Borkenau P, Mauer N, Riemann R, Spinath FM, Angleitner A. 2004. McCraeRR,CostaPT.1989.Thestructureofinterpersonaltraits:Wig-
Thin slices of behavior as cues of personality and intelligence. gins’s circumplex and the five-factor model. J Pers Soc Psychol.
JPersSocPsychol.86:599–614. 56:586–595.
Buckner RL, Carroll DC. 2007. Self-projection and the brain. Trends McIntosh AR. 1999. Mapping cognition to the brain through neural
CognSci.11:49–57. interactions.Memory.7:523–548.
Carruthers P, Smith P, editors. 1996. Theories of theories of mind. Mitchell JP, Cloutier J, Banaji MR, Macrae CN. 2006. Medial
Cambridge(MA):CambridgeUniversityPress. prefrontal dissociations during processing of trait diagnostic and
Chang CC, Lin CJ. 2011. LIBSVM: a library for support vector nondiagnostic person information. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci.
machines.ACMTransIntSystTechnol.2:1–27. 1:49–55.
Costa PTJ, McCraeRR.1992. NEOPI-Rprofessionalmanual.Odessa Nichols TE, Holmes AP. 2002. Nonparametric permutation tests for
(FL):PsychologicalAssessmentResources,Inc. functional neuroimaging: A primer with examples. Hum Brain
DeYoung CG. 2010. Personality neuroscience and the biology of
Mapp.15:1–25.
traits.SocialPersonalityPsycholCompass.4:1165–1180. Norman KA, Polyn SM, Detre GJ, Haxby JV. 2006. Beyond mind-
DeYoung CG, Quilty LC, Peterson JB. 2007. Between facets and reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data. Trends Cogn
domains:10aspectsoftheBigFive.JPersSocPsychol.93:880–896. Sci.10:424–430.
DeYoungCG,WeisbergYJ,QuiltyLC,PetersonJB.forthcoming2012. ParkB.1986.Amethodforstudyingthedevelopmentofimpressions
UnifyingtheaspectsoftheBigFive,theinterpersonalcircumplex,
ofrealpeople.JPersSocPsychol.51:907–917.
andtraitaffiliation.JPers.doi:10.1111/jopy.12020. Park B, DeKay ML, Kraus S. 1994. Aggregating social behavior into
FleesonW, GallagherP. 2009. The implications of Big Five standing personmodels:perceiver-inducedconsistency.JPersSocPsychol.
for the distribution of trait manifestation in behavior: fifteen 66:437–459.
experience-sampling studies and a meta-analysis. J Pers Soc Pereira F,MitchellT,BotvinickM.2009.Machine learning classifiers
Psychol.97:1097–1114. andfMRI:atutorialoverview.Neuroimage.45:S199–209.
FrithU,FrithCD.2003.Developmentandneurophysiologyofmenta- PremackD,WoodruffG.1978.Doesthechimpanzeehaveatheoryof
lizing.PhilosTransRSocLondBBiolSci.358:459–473. mind?BehavBrainSci.1:515–526.
Hanke M, Halchenko YO, Sederberg PB, Olivetti E, Fründ I, Reiger RabinJS,GilboaA,StussDT,MarRA,RosenbaumRS.2010.Common
JW, Herrmann CS, Haxby JV, Hanson SJ, Pollman S. 2009. and unique neural correlates of autobiographical memory and
PyMVPA: a unifying approach to the analysis of neuroscientific theoryofmind.JCognNeurosci.22:1095–1111.
data.FrontNeuroinfor.3:3. Rapp DN, Gerrig RJ. 2001. Readers’ trait-based models of characters
HarrisLT,TodorovA,FiskeST.2005.Attributionsonthebrain:neu- innarrativecomprehension.JMemLang.45:737–750.
roimagingdispositionalinferencesbeyondtheoryofmind.Neuro- RobertsBW,Kuneel NR, ShinerR, CaspiA, Goldberg LR.2007. The
image.28:763–769. powerofpersonality:thecomparativevalidityofpersonalitytraits,
HassabisD,ChuC,ReesG,WeiskopfN,MolyneuxPD,MaguireEA. socioeconomic status, and cognitive ability for predicting impor-
2009.Decodingneuronalensemblesinthehumanhippocampus.
tantlifeoutcomes.PerspectPsycholSci.2:313–345.
CurrBiol.19:546–554. Roediger HL III, Karpicke JD. 2006. The power of testing memory:
HassabisD,KumaranD,MaguireEA.2007.Usingimaginationtoun- basic research and implications foreducationalpractice.Perspect
derstand the neural basis of episodic memory. J Neurosci.
PsycholSci.181–210.
27:14365–14374. SchacterDL.2012.Adaptiveconstructiveprocessesandthefutureof
Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Vann SD, Maguire EA. 2007. Patients with
memory.AmPsychol.67:603–613.
hippocampalamnesiacannotimaginenewexperiences.ProcNatl Schacter DL, Addis DR, Buckner RL. 2008. Episodic simulation of
AcadSciUSA.104:1726–1731. futureevents:concepts,data,andapplications.AnnNYAcadSci.
HassabisD,MaguireEA.2007.Deconstructingepisodicmemorywith
1124:39–60.
construction.TrendsCognSci.11:299–306. SchacterDL,AddisDR,BucknerRL.2007.Rememberingthepastto
HaynesJD,ReesG.2006.Decodingmentalstatesfrombrainactivity imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nat Rev Neurosci.
inhumans.NatRevNeurosci.7:523–534. 8:657–661.
Hopfinger JB, Buchel C, Holmes AP, Friston KJ. 2000. A study of Schacter DL, Addis DR, Hassabis D, Martin VC, Spreng RN, Szpunar
analysis parameters that influence the sensitivity of event-related KK. 2012. The future of memory: remembering, imagining, and
fMRIanalyses.Neuroimage.11:326–333. thebrain.Neuron.76:677–694.
IngvarDH.1979.Hyperfrontaldistributionofthecerebralgreymatter SoonCS,BrassM,HeinzeHJ,HaynesJD.2008.Unconsciousdetermi-
flowinrestingwakefulness:onthefunctionalanatomyofthecon- nants of free decisions in the human brain. Nat Neurosci.
sciousstate.NeurolScand.60:12–25. 11:543–545.
KriegeskorteN,GoebelR,BandettiniP.2006.Information-basedfunc- SprengRN,GradyCL.2010.Patternsofbrainactivitysupportingauto-
tionalbrainmapping.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.103:3863–3868. biographical memory, prospection, and theory-of-mind and their
1986 PredictingBehaviorUsingPersonalityModels (cid:129) Hassabisetal.
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014

--- PAGE 9 ---
relationship to the default mode network. J Cogn Neurosci. Uleman JS, Adil Saribay S, Gonzalez CM. 2008. Spontaneous infer-
22:1112–1123. ences, implicit impressions, and implicit theories. Annu Rev
Spreng RN, Mar RA. 2012. I remember you: a role for memory in Psychol.59:329–360.
social cognition and the functional neuroanatomy of their inter- Vazire S, Mehl MR. 2008. Knowing me, knowing you: the accuracy
action.BrainRes.1428:43–50. and unique predictive validity of self-ratings and other-ratings of
Spreng RN, Mar RA, Kim ASN. 2009. The common neural basis of dailybehavior.JPersSocPsychol.95:1202–1216.
autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, theory of von dem Hagen E, Stoyanova RS, Baron-Cohen S, Calder AJ. forth-
mind and the default mode: a quantitative meta-analysis. J Cogn coming. Reduced functional connectivity within and between
Neurosci.32:489–510. “social”restingstatenetworksinAutismSpectrumConditions.Soc
SuddendorfT,CorballisMC.2007.Theevolutionofforesight:whatis CognAffectNeurosci.
mental time travel and is it unique to humans? Behav Brain Sci. Wagner DD, Haxby JR, Heatherton TS. 2012. The representation of
30:299–313. selfandpersonknowledgeinthemedialprefrontalcortex.WIRES
Taylor SE, Pham LB, Rivkin ID, Armor DA. 1998. Harnessing the CognSci.3:451–470.
imagination: mental simulation, self-regulation, and coping. Am WorsleyKJ,MarrettS,NeelinP,EvansAC.1996.Searchingscalespace
Psychol.53:429–439. foractivationinPETimages.HumBrainMapp.4:74–90.
CerebralCortexAugust2014,V24N8 1987
Downloaded
from
http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/
at
York
University
Libraries
on
July
14,
2014
