
--- PAGE 1 ---
FOCUS | COMMENT
FOCUS | comment
Protein structure predictions to atomic accuracy
with AlphaFold
AlphaFold is a neural-network-based approach to predicting protein structures with high accuracy. We describe
how it works in general terms and discuss some anticipated impacts on the field of structural biology.
John Jumper and Demis Hassabis
I
n the 2020 Critical Assessment of protein machine-learning algorithms, consisting interpreted as a communication between
Structure Prediction (CASP14), the of pipelines of alternating linear and different sequence positions, we add a special
AlphaFold system1 predicted almost nonlinear components, called layers, that are connection to our ‘pair representation’ that
two-thirds of the target protein structures typically ‘trained’ (the process of optimizing enables the network to modulate these
at an accuracy that the assessors considered parameters) using gradient descent on the interactions on the basis of its understanding
competitive with that of experimental error of the final predictions. The accuracy of pairwise residue interactions. In practice,
methods (~1 Å typical deviation on the and generality of the trained neural network this means that the network learns rapidly in
backbone)2. This advance, which builds on is highly dependent on the design of the training to enforce communication between
decades of work to create comprehensive network architecture (the layers used and sequence-distant positions in the protein
databases of protein sequences and how they are connected) and its training. To that are spatially local in the folded structure,
structures3–5, has enabled large increases in develop AlphaFold’s neural network, we set without requiring hard-coding of a specific
the structural coverage of model organism out to create new network architectures and geometric algorithm. Similarly, the training
proteomes, including a doubling of the training procedures that are aligned with our is adapted so that the neural network can
fraction of the human proteome whose understanding of protein biology. make effective use of protein sequence data
structure is known to high accuracy6. A key to AlphaFold’s success is the even when the structures are unknown
At the core of AlphaFold is a new establishment of communication patterns and is encouraged to learn generalized
kind of neural network whose building within and between components of the coevolution patterns. The combined effect of
blocks are adapted specifically to the network that are sympathetic to the concepts these and many other ideas on the network
problem of predicting protein structure. of protein physics and biology. For example, are dramatic: AlphaFold can be trained
Neural networks are a large class of wherever there is an interaction that can be to produce vastly more accurate structure
AlphaFold
Experimentally determined
Expanded coverage with structure prediction
Fig. 1 | AlphaFold as an amplifier of sparse experimental data. Schematic illustration of the role of machine learning, which converts a smaller amount
experimentally determined data into a comprehensive set of experimental predictions.
NATURE METHODS | VOL 19 | JANUARY 2022 | 11–26 | www.nature.com/naturemethods 11

--- PAGE 2 ---
COMMENT | FOCUS
comment | FOCUS
predictions using the same Protein Data but genomic coverage can be increased Although these and related developments
Bank (PDB) training data as earlier, less much more rapidly. In effect, AlphaFold will ultimately bring us quite a bit
accurate methods. amplifies the combined output of the further toward modeling the geometry of
Despite being trained on only single experimental protein structure community well-structured protein components,
protein chains that appear in the PDB, to create a vastly larger universe of reliable there is still much more to achieve in
the AlphaFold network shows significant protein structures (Fig. 1). The structural understanding the dynamical and functional
generalization to other protein structure prediction of entire proteomes also behavior of these components, as well as
tasks due to its very high accuracy. creates opportunities to interpret protein understanding the vast disordered regions
AlphaFold predicts the structure of proteins structure at scale and to add geometric of the proteome. It is quite possible, though,
with novel folds at approximately the and biophysical context to protein-coding that other areas of cell biology can replicate
same accuracy as that of proteins with variants in the genome. Just as with what occurred for structure prediction:
known folds, implying that the network experimental models, however, care will the impact of carefully collected, diverse
is prioritizing local interactions over need to be taken to interpret the confidence biological resources like the PDB can be
recognition of global patterns. Similarly, the and limitations of the computational models amplified by many orders of magnitude
network is tolerant of sequences containing to make sure that conclusions drawn from through the development of the right
large disordered segments, and the low them are well founded and possible errors in machine-learning tools. ❐
confidence of AlphaFold in these regions the models are understood.
can be repurposed as a reliable predictor of These computational models can also John Jumper ✉ and Demis Hassabis ✉
intrinsically disordered regions6,7. be expected to accelerate progress in DeepMind, London, UK.
As a more stringent test of generalization, experimental structure determination. ✉e-mail: jumper@deepmind.com; dhcontact@
AlphaFold is able to accurately predict the A large fraction of X-ray structures can be deepmind.com
structure of artificial constructs that include phased via molecular replacement using
multiple proteins joined with flexible linkers AlphaFold-predicted structures11, and Published online: 11 January 2022
or artificial sequence gaps8. Note that this the network’s predictions are excellent https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01362-6
is a situation that is rarely, if ever, observed starting points for building models
References
in AlphaFold’s training data, but obeys the into experimental electron densities12.
1. Jumper, J. et al. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021).
same physical and geometric principles Additionally, knowledge of the protein 2. Pereira, J. et al. Proteins 89, 1687–1699 (2021).
as regular protein structure. Using these topology and domain structures will enable 3. wwPDB Consortium. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D520–D528 (2018).
artificial linker or gap sequences, the better design of experimental constructs for 4. Bateman, A. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489 (2021).
5. Mitchell, A. L. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 48(D1), D570–D578
AlphaFold network can be used to predict structure determination. Recent work on
(2020).
protein–protein interactions at an accuracy the nuclear pore complex13 has shown that 6. Tunyasuvunakool, K. et al. Nature 596, 590–596 (2021).
that exceeds even that of specialized protein monomer and pairwise heteromer modeling 7. Akdel, M., Pires, D. E. V., Pardo, E. P., Jänes, J. & Zalevsky, A. O.
Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.26.461876
interaction predictors despite being trained can be very effectively combined with
(2021).
only on single protein chains9. Prediction of low-resolution cryo-electron microscopy 8. Yin, R., Feng, B. Y., Varshney, A. & Pierce, B. G. Preprint at
heteromeric interactions can be substantially data to provide atomic-scale models of bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.23.465575 (2021).
increased, however, by including protein– enormous molecular machines. 9. Bryant, P., Pozzati, G. & Elofsson, A. Preprint at bioRxiv https://
doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.15.460468 (2021).
protein interactions in the training of the AlphaFold and related technologies will 10. Evans, R., O’Neill, M., Pritzel, A., Antropova, N. & Senior, A.W.
neural network10. Despite these advances, make it possible to build atomistic models bioRxiv (2021).
the prediction of protein interactions still of many more cellular processes using 11. Millán, C. et al. Proteins 89, 1752–1769 (2021).
12. Kryshtafovych, A. et al. Proteins 89, 1633–1646 (2021).
requires development, and current issues abundant pairwise connections made by
13. Mosalaganti, S. et al. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
including false negatives and difficulties protein interaction models. Early work in org/10.1101/2021.10.26.465776 (2021).
with antibody binding can likely be greatly this direction has already uncovered many 14. Humphreys, I. R. et al. Science https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
abm4805 (2021).
reduced with further research. new eukaryotic interactions14,15, and further
15. Burke, D. F. et al. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
In the immediate term, the availability advances in heteromer modeling will greatly org/10.1101/2021.11.08.467664 (2021).
of an accurate method of predicting protein expand our coverage of protein interaction
Acknowledgements
structure will allow many functional networks. This will create the need for new
We thank K. Tunyasuvunakool for helping with the figure;
studies to proceed based on structural computational methods to interpret the
R. Bates, M. Figurnov, T. Green and Z. Wu for their
hypotheses developed from the predicted structural biology of molecular pathways at suggestions and comments; and C. Meyer for helping to
models that would previously have required scale and is likely to create new opportunities prepare the manuscript.
experimental models. This will be especially for deep learning systems to interpret
Competing interests
useful for understudied organisms and in these data in conjunction with large-scale,
The authors have filed patent applications in the name
metagenomics, where structural coverage low-resolution experimental techniques such
of DeepMind Technologies Limited relating to machine
is often very sparse and slow to extend as cryo-electron tomography. learning for protein structure prediction.
12 NATURE METHODS | VOL 19 | JANUARY 2022 | 11–26 | www.nature.com/naturemethods
