
--- PAGE 1 ---
Biological Sciences - Neuroscience
Social Sciences - Psychological and Cognitive Sciences
Title: Semantic representations in the temporal pole
predict false memories
Martin J. Chadwick1,2*, Raeesa S. Anjum2, Dharshan Kumaran1, Daniel L. Schacter3,4*,
Hugo J. Spiers2†, Demis Hassabis1†
Affiliations:
1Google DeepMind, London, UK
2Institute of Behavioural Neuroscience, Department of Experimental Psychology,
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, London,
UK
3Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
4Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
*To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: mjchadwick@google.com or
dls@wjh.harvard.edu
†Joint senior authors
Keywords:
False Memory; Semantic; Temporal Pole; fMRI; Pattern Similarity
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Abstract
Recent advances in neuroscience have given us unprecedented insight into the
neural mechanisms of false memory, showing that artificial memories can be
inserted into the memory cells of the hippocampus in a way that is indistinguishable
from true memories. However, this alone is not enough to explain how false
memories can arise naturally in the course of our daily lives. Cognitive psychology
has demonstrated that many instances of false memory, both in the lab and the real
world, can be attributed to semantic interference. While previous studies have
found that a diverse set of regions show some involvement in semantic false
memory, none have revealed the nature of the semantic representations
underpinning the phenomenon. Here we use functional MRI (fMRI) with
representational similarity analysis to search for a neural code consistent with
semantic false memory. We find clear evidence that false memories emerge from a
similarity-based neural code in the temporal pole, a region that has been called the
“semantic hub” of the brain. We further show that each individual has a partially
unique semantic code within the temporal pole, and this unique code can predict
idiosyncratic patterns of memory errors. Finally, we show that the same neural code
can also predict variation in true memory performance, consistent with an adaptive
perspective on false memory. Together, our findings reveal the underlying structure
of neural representations of semantic knowledge, and how this semantic structure
can both enhance and distort our memories.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Significance Statement
False memories can arise in daily life through a mixture of factors including
misinformation and prior conceptual knowledge. This can have serious
consequences in settings such as legal eyewitness testimony, which depend on the
accuracy of memory. We investigated the brain basis of false memory with
functional MRI, and found that patterns of activity in the temporal pole region of the
brain can predict false memories. Furthermore, we show that each individual has
unique patterns of brain activation that can predict their own idiosyncratic set of
false memory errors. Together, these results suggest that the temporal pole may be
responsible for the conceptual component of illusory memories.
\body
Each of us has a vast store of semantic knowledge that we apply to incoming
sensory data in order to extract meaning from the world around us. Semantic
representations are capable of capturing important structural features of the world
at many different levels of abstraction, which allows for rapid and flexible responses
to a diverse array of environmental challenges. This pre-existing knowledge
structure guides ongoing cognition which usually aids performance, but under some
circumstances can lead us into error (1–3). A striking example is the widely studied
DRM (Deese, Roediger, and McDermott) false memory illusion (4, 5). In a typical
DRM task, subjects are asked to memorize a set of words such as “snow”, “winter”,
“ice”, and “warm”. After a delay, subjects will typically falsely remember having
seeing the semantically related word “cold”. It is widely agreed that this memory
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
illusion is driven by the semantic relatedness between words contained in the
encoding list (e.g. “snow”) and falsely remembered words that were not actually
presented (e.g. “cold”). As such, it is thought that each list item automatically, but
weakly, activates the semantically related concept (Fig. 1A). This activation leads to
memory confusion either through a cumulative priming of the related lure (5, 6), or
the encoding of the semantic overlap as a “gist” memory (3), resulting in a false
memory unless the error is detected by some internal monitoring process (7). As
such, the DRM effect provides a powerful method for investigating both the nature
of false memories as well as the structure of semantic knowledge and its effects on
cognition.
Despite the well-characterized cognitive mechanisms involved in the DRM effect (7),
its neural basis is currently not well understood. Previous neuroimaging and patient
studies have provided robust evidence that a core network of regions in the medial
and lateral temporal lobe, as well as frontal and parietal regions (8–16) is involved
when encoding or retrieving semantic false memories. However, a mechanistic
understanding of how these regions generate false memories is lacking. In
particular, although it is known that the semantic relatedness between the different
words drives the illusion (3, 6, 7), little is known about the neural basis of this
semantic relatedness. Computational models of semantic cognition propose that
concepts are represented by a similarity-based code in an amodal “semantic hub”,
situated in the apex of the ventral processing stream in the temporal pole (17, 18).
While other regions such as the temporo-parietal cortex (19) have also been linked
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
to the representation of abstract conceptual knowledge, the temporal pole is most
consistently implicated in both patient and neuroimaging studies (17, 20, 21).
These computational models therefore make clear predictions about the expected
neural basis of semantic false memory. Namely, the temporal pole (TP) semantic
hub should contain a similarity-based code such that the neural representations of
DRM words reflect the known semantic relatedness between those words.
Furthermore, the likelihood that a given word list will generate a false memory
should be directly related to the degree of neural overlap. This prediction has not
previously been investigated, despite the clear implications for understanding both
false memory and the structure of semantic knowledge. Here we used functional
MRI (fMRI) to measure the neural overlap between DRM lists and related lures,
allowing us to directly test this prediction.
Results
We used a representational similarity analysis (RSA) approach, which uses the
neural pattern similarity between pairs of stimuli to infer the representational
similarity (22). This method is therefore well-suited for assessing neural overlap
between semantic representations (23–25), as the degree of overlap should be
directly reflected in the representational similarity. We used this approach to
measure the degree of neural overlap between each set of DRM words and their
related lure word (Fig. 1). Crucially, each DRM list is known to have a different
probability of inducing a false memory, with some much greater than others (26,
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
27). If our prediction is correct, then we should find a brain region displaying a
direct correspondence between the degree of neural overlap and false memory
likelihood across the different DRM word lists. To measure the neural
representations of the DRM word lists, eighteen participants viewed 40 separate
four-word DRM lists, along with the 40 associated lure words (Table S1), while we
collected fMRI data. While viewing the words, subjects performed an incidental
categorization task (manmade or natural) in order to ensure that all words were
processed at the semantic level. We used the canonical false recognition scores
reported in (27) as our measure of false memory likelihood, and applied a
searchlight analysis (28) across the whole brain to establish whether any brain
region displayed the predicted positive correlation between neural overlap and
false memory likelihood.
This analysis revealed a significant cluster in the left temporal pole (TP), with no
other significant information anywhere else in the brain. This result provides
evidence that this specific region is responsible for encoding the semantic
relatedness between thematically related words (Fig. 2). Furthermore, this result
shows that the precise level of neural overlap in the TP predicts the probability that
a false memory will be constructed for a given DRM list. This result is therefore fully
consistent with the computational accounts of semantic cognition, and
demonstrates that a similarity-based code in the TP is capable of generating false
memories. Strikingly, our measure of false memory likelihood is a canonical
measure taken from an independent set of subjects (26, 27), yet we can nevertheless
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
successfully predict this information based purely on the neural data of our group of
subjects. This result clearly demonstrates a robust level of agreement across
different individuals in the neural representation of the concepts contained within
the DRM lists. Thus, it appears that the TP is responsible for representing a shared
conceptual space, which is a vital component of successful communication. For
completeness, we also looked for regions displaying a negative correlation between
neural overlap and false memory likelihood, although it is not clear that any such
correlation is theoretically meaningful. This analysis revealed a single significant
cluster in the right superior frontal gyrus (peak MNI coordinates: 24, 20, 50;
Pseudo-t = 4.71; cluster extent = 163 voxels).
In order to ensure that TP neural data are really capturing meaningful semantic
representations, we ran an additional set of control analyses based on the
functionally defined TP region of interest (ROI). We examined four issues. First, if
the neural data are capturing semantic relatedness between the lure and list items,
we should find that each lure is more similar to its own list than any other list,
regardless of any differences in false memory strength. To assess this hypothesis,
we directly compared the neural similarity within and across the 40 DRM sets. As
expected, this analysis revealed a significant within-set increase in similarity
(Z=3.11, p<0.001). Second, to ensure that the neural effects were not driven by
extraneous factors such as the word frequency or the visual similarity of the lure
and list words, we investigated whether either of these factors correlated with the
TP neural overlap. Neither of these variables significantly predicted the neural data
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
(Word Frequency: Z=0.02, p=0.98; Visual Similarity: Z=1.72, p=0.085), suggesting
that they are not significant drivers of neural similarity in this region. Third, the task
performed in the scanner while subjects viewed the words was a semantic category
judgment task (man-made or natural). While the categorical nature of the encoding
task was incidental to the effect of interest, it is nevertheless possible that neural
representations related to the semantic categories are present in the TP. To
investigate this possibility we derived a subject-specific measure of task category
similarity between the lure and list of each DRM set based on the pattern of
responses to each word (see Methods). We found no evidence for a correlation
between this variable and the neural data (Z=0.46, p=0.65), suggesting that task-
driven categorical representations are not present in the TP. Finally, we investigated
whether the correlation between neural overlap and canonical false memory
strength was still present after controlling for the three additional variables (word
frequency, visual similarity, and categorical representation). Using a cross-validated
ROI approach to avoid issues of statistical circularity (29), we found clear evidence
for a significant correlation between neural overlap and canonical false memory
even after partialling out the control variables (Z=2.03, p=0.021). Thus, our result
cannot be explained by extraneous factors such as word frequency or visual
similarity. We further explored each of these three control variables using a
searchlight analysis across the whole brain, but none of these analyses revealed any
significant results. Given that our measure of neural overlap is in each case based on
the average pattern expressed over four list items, this will greatly reduce the
power of any analysis that is not explicitly based on some shared representation,
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
such as the semantic gist. Thus, it is not surprising that these additional analyses did
not find any significant results.
While our initial analysis focused on shared semantic representations, it is also
likely that each of us forms some idiosyncratic semantic associations through our
own individual experience. Such quirks of experience could lead to measurable
differences in neural overlap in the TP, and consequently to unique patterns of false
memory errors. In order to investigate this possibility, our subjects participated in a
DRM false memory recognition task in a separate session that took place several
weeks prior to the scanning session. The same 40 DRM word lists were used in both
the behavioral and scanning sessions, which allowed us to directly compare each
individual's neural data to their behavioral data. As expected, the subjects displayed
the typical false memory effect, and committed a large number of high-confidence
false alarms to the critical lure stimuli (Fig. 3). As a further quality control check, we
explored the consistency of our group’s behavioral data compared to the canonical
false memory data (26, 27). The group false memory likelihood correlated positively
with both the canonical data (r(39)=0.53, p<0.001) and with the neural data
(Z=1.68, p=0.047), demonstrating that this subject group’s data conforms to the
canonical data as expected.
However, the key question was whether there might be a subject-specific mapping
between the TP neural overlap and the pattern of false memory errors, over and
above any shared semantic representations common to all subjects. To assess this
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
issue we used an individuation analysis (30), comparing the within-subject neural-
behavioral correlations (unique semantic information) to the between-subject
neural-behavioral correlations (shared semantic information), in each case
controlling for the canonical false memory strength to remove additional shared
semantic information. This analysis revealed a significantly higher within- than
between-subject correlation (Z=2.63, p=0.0042). This result was still significant
after additionally partialling out the influence of the three control variables
discussed above (Z=2.55, p=0.0054). This result provides clear evidence that each
individual has a partially unique set of semantic representations within the TP that
have a direct impact on memory distortions (Fig. 4). Importantly, such a result
cannot be explained by incidental differences in TP physiology or anatomy alone
(30), as these more basic properties would not predict each subject’s false memory
behavior.
Importantly, the fMRI and behavioral data for each subject were collected in
separate sessions separated by many weeks, which demonstrates that the structure
of neural overlap must be stable over at least this length of time, and plausibly for
much longer than this. This long delay also minimized any possible influence of the
initial behavioral session on the neural representations expressed during scanning.
To further ensure that there was no such influence, we leveraged the wide range of
inter-session delay lengths across subjects (min=21 days, max=239 days) that
emerged as a consequence of differences in subject availability. If there were an
effect of the behavioral session due to memory for the items experienced in this
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
session, we would expect this effect to degrade over time. We would therefore
expect a negative correlation between the length of delay and the strength of neural-
behavioral mapping. In fact we find a non-significant positive correlation instead
(r=0.26, p=0.30), which clearly shows that memory is not enhancing the neural
overlap data.
The main focus of this study was to investigate the neural basis of false memory.
However, an adaptive perspective on false memory (1) would suggest that our
semantic knowledge should aid cognition under most circumstances (31), rather
than purely acting as a source of memory distortion. This hypothesis would
therefore suggest that we ought to also find a positive correlation between neural
overlap and true memory performance for the list items that were actually
presented during encoding. As predicted, we found a significant mapping between
TP neural overlap and true memory strength (Z=2.33, p=0.0099), which remained
significant after partialling out the three control variables (Z=2.29, p=0.011). We
also investigated the possibility that subject-specific TP neural coding might predict
true memory performance, using an individuation analysis (30). This analysis
demonstrated a significant individuation effect in the TP for true memories (Z=2.16,
p=0.016) as well as false, and this result remained significant after partialling out
the three control variables (Z=2.11, p=0.017). These results provide clear evidence
that the semantic similarity code within this region can be beneficial for memory
systems, as well as potentially leading to memory distortions.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Discussion
Our study demonstrates that the left temporal pole (TP) contains partially
overlapping neural representations of related concepts, and that the extent of this
neural overlap directly reflects the degree of semantic similarity between the
concepts. Furthermore, the neural overlap between sets of related words predicts
the likelihood of making a false memory error. Together, these findings provide
support for neural network models of semantic cognition that posit that the TP
utilizes a similarity-based coding scheme to sustain amodal distributed
representations of individual concepts and their relationships within an abstract
semantic space (17, 18). The similarity-based coding of concepts has significant
computational advantages in allowing efficient generalization of existing knowledge
to novel situations, while still allowing for the “grounding” of each concept in a full
set of domain-specific cortical regions mediated by the hub-like connectivity of the
TP (17, 18) – consistent with previous studies showing that domain-specific
semantic features are indeed distributed across a wide range of cortical regions
(32). Nevertheless, our results suggest that the type of coding scheme underpinning
the representation of concepts within the TP has a potential cost, specifically the
emergent property of false memories.
Although the focus of our experiment was on the structure of semantic
representations, it is likely that interactions between regions in the medial temporal
lobe (MTL) and the TP are critical to the generation of false memories. While our
data cannot speak directly to this issue, there are two clear lines of evidence that are
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
suggestive. First, results from both rodent (33) and human research (34)
demonstrate that false memories can be established as memory “engrams” within
the hippocampus through artificial manipulation or reconsolidation processes.
Second, recent studies have shown that recognition memory performance can be
driven by a dynamic similarity-based computation within the MTL at retrieval (35,
36). It is likely that both sets of processes interact with the semantic representations
in the TP in order to produce semantic false memories (3, 6, 37) .
While we found clear evidence for a semantic code within the left TP, other
neighboring regions have also been found to contain semantic-like representations
– particularly the anterior ventral temporal cortex (23, 25). We suggest that these
differing locations are likely due to the level of semantic abstraction, as the set of
studies with results located in anterior ventral temporal cortex all used highly
concrete stimuli (either concrete words, or direct use of pictures). By contrast, our
set of words included many abstract concepts such as “justice” and “desire” (see
Table S1 for full list). This suggestion is supported by a meta-analysis that
contrasted regions involved in abstract versus concrete words, and that found clear
evidence that the temporal pole was more active in response to abstract words,
while ventral temporal regions showed a preference for concrete words (20).
Finally, our results show that each individual’s unique TP representations predict
idiosyncratic patterns of false memory errors. Given that we rely on shared
semantic representation in order to communicate with one another, this individual
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
variation is perhaps surprising. However, it does converge with other recent reports
of individual differences in semantic (30) and episodic representation (38), and
suggests that divergent personal experience is sufficient to create individually
unique representations in higher-level semantic regions. This striking finding
suggests that it will be important to further characterize both the shared and
individually unique aspects of semantic cognition to better understand the nature of
conceptual knowledge.
Methods
Participants
18 participants (11 female) took part in this study. All were right-handed native
English speakers, and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The study was
approved by the University College London research ethics committee, and all
participants gave written consent to take part in the study.
Stimuli
For both testing sessions, the stimuli were drawn from forty standard DRM lists (26,
27). Due to time-constraints in the fMRI scanning session, we used only four list
items from each DRM list (see Fig. 3B for a comparison with previous results based
on the full set of 15 list items). Where possible these were four list items with the
highest associative strength with the lure word. However, this full set of forty lists
contains some words that were repeated across lists, and some words that we
considered to be culturally specific in semantic relatedness to the related concept,
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
such as “United States” in the “army” list. Any unsuitable list words were therefore
excluded, and alternative, lower list associates were included instead. The full set of
stimuli used is displayed in the Table S1. In total, the stimulus set included 40 DRM
related concept lures, and 160 associated DRM list items. For the behavioral DRM
task, we also used an additional 160 unrelated novel words, which were matched to
the DRM lists in average concreteness and frequency.
Overall task structure
All participants took part in two separate experimental sessions separated by
several weeks (mean 65 days, min=21, max=239). The first session was a behavioral
session involving a standard DRM recognition paradigm, providing subject-specific
false memory data. The second session was a functional MRI session, where subjects
viewed words taken from the DRM lists during an incidental task. Both sessions are
explained in more detail below. We elected to run the behavioral session before the
scanning session to ensure that repeated exposure to the DRM words during
scanning did not impact the behavioral false memory effects. This procedure
therefore provided us with a “pure” measure of individual false memories. However,
we acknowledge that this design could still have the reverse problem, in that there
could be carry-over effects from the behavioral to the fMRI session. The long delay
between sessions was built in to minimize any such issues, and further control
analyses were conducted to further rule this out as a problem (see Results).
Behavioral DRM task
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
The first testing session was purely behavioral, and involved a standard DRM
recognition paradigm. During an encoding phase, subjects were presented with 40
sets of four-word DRM lists. They were instructed to memorize as many of the
presented words as possible. For each list, the four words were presented
consecutively for 500ms each, with a 3s interval between each list. The order of the
40 lists was randomized across subjects. Subjects were then required to perform an
incidental visual discrimination task for 15 minutes, in order to minimize explicit
rehearsal of the list words. Following this distraction period, subjects were given a
recognition memory test for the previously presented words. All 160 DRM list
words were presented, along with the 40 related concept lure words, and 160
unrelated novel words. This set of 360 words was presented one at a time, in a
randomized order. Subjects were required to decide whether they thought the word
was old or new, along with a confidence judgment (sure or unsure). The task was
self-paced, with no time limit.
Behavioral DRM analysis
The recognition memory test data were analyzed to determine whether the subjects
displayed the expected false memory effect. To do this analysis, for each subject we
calculated the proportion of words categories as ‘Old’ for each of the three
conditions (Old items, New items, and Lure items). This provided us with a measure
of the Hit rate, False Alarm rate, and for the related concept lure items, False
Memory rate. To assess whether the expected false memory effects were present,
we conducted a series of planned pairwise comparisons between conditions using
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
two-tailed Wilcoxon signed rank tests. First, we tested for a basic recognition
memory effect, by comparing the Hit rate to the False Alarm rate. Next, we
investigated whether our subjects displayed the expected false memory effect, by
comparing the False Memory rate with the False Alarm rate. Following this, we
compared False Memory and False Alarm rate using just high confidence trials in
order to determine whether the task induced robust false memories. Finally, we
investigated whether the pattern of false memory errors across the 40 DRM lists
correlated with the false memory rate reported by (27), despite the fact that we
used only the first four list associates from each DRM list, as opposed to the full set
of 15. All behavioral results are reported in Fig. 3.
fMRI task
Several weeks later, the same subjects came in for a second testing session in the
fMRI scanner. During each of four functional runs, the 40 DRM related concepts, and
160 DRM list words were presented one at a time, for 3s each. Thus, in total, each
word was presented 4 times, in order to allow a more stable estimate of the neural
pattern. The order of presentation was randomized, with the additional constraint
that words from the same DRM set were never presented consecutively. Each
subject took part in four functional runs in total. The behavioral task involved a
semantic category decision for each presented word. Specifically, subjects had to
decide whether they thought each word was more related to the category of
‘manmade’ or ‘natural’, and indicate this by pressing the relevant button. As we
were simply interested in measuring the neural patterns expressed for each DRM
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
concept, the task itself was incidental. However, we reasoned that a semantic
categorization task would require the subjects to fully process the semantic
meaning of each word. The fact that each word would be repeated four times during
scanning introduces a possible source of noise due to novelty effects on the first
presentation. We therefore allowed the subjects one practice block prior to entering
the scanner in order to reduce any novelty signals in the subsequent scanning
session.
MRI scan details
It is well known that fMRI of the temporal poles can be problematic due to
susceptibility artifacts (signal dropout) in this region, which can substantially
reduce BOLD sensitivity (39). We therefore elected to use a 1.5 tesla MRI scanner,
which suffers from less pronounced dropout in this region, and therefore can
actually have greater BOLD sensitivity than higher field-strength scanners (40). The
precise sequences used were further optimized to reduce signal dropout in ventral
anterior regions, including the temporal pole. All MRI data was collected using a
Siemens Avanto 1.5 tesla MRI scanner with a 32-channel head coil at the Birkbeck-
UCL Centre for Neuroimaging (BUCNI) in London. The functional data were acquired
using a gradient-echo EPI sequence in an ascending sequence, with a slice thickness
of 2mm and a 1mm gap, TR=85ms, TE=50ms, slice tilt=-30°, field of view 192mm,
and matrix size 64×64. The whole brain was acquired with 40 slices, leading to a
volume acquisition time of 3.4s. The precise slice tilt was chosen as a compromise
between sensitivity, coverage, and speed (40, 41). Four functional runs were
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
collected for each participant. Following functional imaging, an anatomical image
was acquired for each participant (T1-weighted FLASH, TR = 12ms, TE = 5.6ms,
1mm3 resolution).
fMRI pre-processing
The first six functional volumes were discarded to allow for T1 equilibration. The
remaining data were slice-time corrected, and spatially realigned. Each participant’s
structural image was co-registered to the first functional image. The structural
images were segmented, and the deformations estimated during this step were
applied to both the structural and functional images in order to normalize them into
MNI space. All preprocessing steps were conducted using SPM12. Default
parameters were chosen for each step.
Pattern estimation
We were interested in investigating neural overlap between the neural
representations of each set of DRM list words and their related concept. Our
hypothesis was that each DRM list word should have a neural representation that
overlaps with that related concept. In order to assess this hypothesis, we estimated
two patterns for each DRM set – one pattern for the related concept itself, and
another for all four of the list words combined. This latter pattern captured the
neural pattern that was common across all four list items, which should therefore
capture the representational overlap. If our hypothesis is correct, then this pattern
should correlate with the related concept pattern. To estimate this set of patterns,
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
we used the GLMdenoise toolbox (42), which implements a denoising step in
addition to estimating the beta weights for each regressor. Each pattern was
estimated using an event-related regressor indicating the onset of the related
concept/set of list words across the four functional sessions. This procedure
resulted in a set of 80 beta weight images (40 DRM list patterns and 40 related lure
concept patterns). These were converted to t-statistics by dividing the parameter
estimate by the estimate of the standard error, thereby normalizing the responses of
each voxel (43). The resulting t-statistic images were left unsmoothed to preserve
any fine-grained spatial information (44).
Searchlight analysis
We used a searchlight representational similarity analysis (22, 28) to search for
brain regions containing the predicted neural code. Representational similarity
analysis (RSA) uses the neural pattern similarity between pairs of stimuli to infer
the representational similarity. This approach is therefore highly appropriate for
assessing neural overlap between semantic representations, as the degree of
overlap should be directly reflected in the representational similarity. We first
assessed the neural overlap between each DRM related concept and its related set of
list words, by measuring the Pearson correlation between the pair of voxel patterns.
In each case, we normalized the similarity data by subtracting the mean Pearson
correlation between the DRM related concept and each unrelated DRM list pattern.
This procedure removed any general effects of similarity that were not driven by
semantic relatedness, and resulted in a vector of 40 neural overlap scores for the 40
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
DRM lists. Our prediction is that the degree of neural overlap within the temporal
pole should reflect semantic relatedness, and therefore predict false memory
likelihood across the 40 DRM lists. We used the canonical false recognition scores
reported in (26, 27) as our measure of false memory likelihood for the 40 DRM lists.
We used a searchlight approach (28) to search across the whole brain for regions
containing a neural code consistent with our predictions. This approach involves
stepping through each voxel in the brain, and in each case running a
representational similarity analysis on the cluster of voxels surrounding that central
voxel (for all analyses, we used a spherical searchlight with 10mm radius). We used
a variation of this approach, where the value at each voxel was the average value of
all searchlight analyses that included that voxel. This information-averaging
approach more accurately reflects the multivariate nature of the analysis, and
results in a smoother image (45). For computational efficiency, we restricted our
analysis to a whole-brain gray matter mask, created by averaging the normalized,
segmented gray matter images, and applying a threshold of 0.5. This searchlight
approach was applied to the analysis described above, using a Fisher-transformed
Pearson correlation to assess the mapping between neural overlap and false
memory likelihood in each searchlight. This was repeated for all subjects, and
statistical significance at each voxel was assessed at the group level using a
nonparametric permutation approach (46). This procedure provides a means of
applying strict family-wise error correction for multiple comparisons without any
parametric assumptions. For this analysis, 10,000 permutations were applied with
10mm variance smoothing, and a standard cluster threshold of Pseudo-t > 3 was
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
used to assess statistical significance (46). Only regions that are significant at p<0.05
with family-wise error correction are reported.
Temporal pole region of interest
In order to further explore the representations contained within the temporal pole,
a region-of-interest (ROI) was created based on the initial searchlight results. The
ROI included all voxels within the TP that passed the searchlight cluster threshold of
t>3. The resulting ROI consisted of 92 voxels.
Correlation between canonical false memory and neural overlap
In Fig. 2B we report the correlation between the group average TP neural overlap
for each DRM list, and the canonical false memory likelihood (26, 27), in order to
illustrate the strength of the relationship. To avoid an artificial inflation of the effect
size estimate due to non-independence in the choice of ROI, we used a leave-one-
subject out cross-validation approach (29). On a given cross-validation fold, we took
the searchlight maps for 17/18 subjects, averaged the maps, and selected the top
200 voxels. We then used these voxels as an ROI to measure the neural overlap in
the 40 DRM lists for the remaining subject (note that in this case we did not
normalize the neural overlap score by subtracting the between-list correlation, as
we consider the raw correlation values to be descriptively more informative). This
procedure was repeated 18 times, each time leaving out a different subject. This
analysis resulted in neural overlap data for all 18 subjects based on an
independently selected ROI, thereby avoiding statistical ‘double-dipping’ (29). We
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
averaged the neural overlap across the subjects to create a single summary neural
overlap score for each of the 40 DRM lists. This score was then correlated with the
canonical false memory scores, as reported in Fig. 2B. An additional correlation was
conducted after removing two potential outliers, identified using a bootstrapped
Mahalanobis distance, and a threshold of Ds > 6. Note that while this cross-
validation approach is guaranteed to provide an unbiased correlation, it is not
guaranteed that the voxels used will be based on the same TP region as reported in
the searchlight results. We therefore investigated the number of voxels falling with
the temporal pole region (defined using the Harvard-Oxford Atlas) for each fold of
the cross-validation. Every single fold included at least some voxels within this
region, ranging from 5 to 42, with an average of 25.5. Thus a good proportion of the
neural information going into this analysis was indeed based on the TP.
False memory individuation analysis
In order to test for the presence of unique TP neural information that predicts
subject-specific false memories, we used an individuation analysis (30). The logic
here is that if an individual has a unique set of TP neural representations that
meaningfully influences cognition, then that individual's neural overlap data should
predict their own pattern of false memory errors better than any other subject's
false memory errors. To assess this possibility, we created a false memory vector for
each individual subject based on their specific pattern of false memory errors in the
behavioral DRM session. Given that we were specifically interested in genuine false
memories rather than mistakes driven by uncertainty, we defined a false memory as
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
a high confidence ‘old’ response to a related concept lure. The false memory vector
was in each case a binary vector of 40 values for the 40 DRM lists, with a 1
indicating the DRM lists that results in a false memory, and 0 elsewhere. For each
subject, we calculated the Spearman correlation between their TP neural overlap
and false memory data (within-subject correlation). We then calculated the
Spearman correlation between that subject’s neural overlap and each other
subject’s false memory data, and averaged across these correlation values to
provide a summary between-subject correlation. This procedure resulted in a
within-subject and between-subject correlation for every subject. To assess whether
there was significantly greater within-subject predictive information in the neural
data, we compared the within- and between-subject correlations with a Wilcoxon
sign rank test. A one-tailed test was used due to our one-sided hypothesis that the
correlation should be greater within- than between-subject.
True memory individuation analysis
In order to be consistent with the false memory analysis, we defined a ‘true
memory’ as a high confidence ‘old’ response to a previously presented DRM list
item. The true memory vector was created by calculating for each DRM list, the
proportion of words that were judged to be ‘old’ with high confidence. This resulted
in a true memory vector of length 40 for each individual subject. The true memory
individuation analysis was otherwise identical to the false memory individuation
analysis described above.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Control analyses
To ensure that the results were driven by neural similarity that was specific to the
false memory strength and not additional extraneous factors, we conducted three
control analyses. First, we established that word frequency (47) was not
contributing to the neural data. Given that the neural overlap was based on the
similarity between each lure and the respective list items, the absolute word
frequency of the critical lure could not by itself explain this measure. Instead, we
calculated the average difference in word frequency between each DRM lure and the
four DRM list items. Second, we investigated whether visual similarity between the
words could be contributing to the effects. We used the Levenshtein edit distance to
assess the similarity between each pair of words, as this has been shown to be a
good predictor of various lexical effects (48), and is therefore appropriate for
assessing low-level word similarity. For each DRM set the visual similarity was
defined as the average edit distance between the lure and list items. Finally, we
explored whether the incidental task performed in the scanner could be driving the
neural similarity results. To investigate this possibility, for each of the 40 DRM lists
we quantified the number of list words where the subject had indicated the same
category as the related lure concept for that list. The stronger the degree of
correspondence, the stronger any task category representation should be for that
particular DRM list. Each of these three control variables was correlated with the
neural overlap data to determine whether each significantly contributed to the
neural data. Additionally, all three variables were controlled for in each analysis
reported in the results section.
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
Acknowledgements and Financial Interests.
H.J.S. is funded by the James S. McDonnell Foundation and The Wellcome Trust.
D.L.S. is supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH060941. None of
the authors has any competing financial interests.
Author Contributions:
MJC, DK, DLS, HJS, DH all contributed to the experimental design. The data were
collected and analyzed by MJC and RSA. The manuscript was written by MJC with
major contributions from DK and DH, and with additional input from HJS and DLS.
References
1. Schacter DL, Guerin SA, St Jacques PL (2011) Memory distortion: An adaptive
perspective. Trends Cogn Sci 15(10):467–74.
2. Qin S, Hermans EJ, van Marle HJF, Fernández G (2012) Understanding low
reliability of memories for neutral information encoded under stress:
Alterations in memory-related activation in the hippocampus and midbrain. J
Neurosci 32(12):4032–41.
3. Reyna VF, Corbin JC, Weldon RB, Brainerd CJ (2016) How fuzzy-trace theory
predicts true and false memories for words, sentences, and narratives. J Appl
Res Mem Cogn 5(1):1–9.
4. Deese J (1959) On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions
in immediate recall. J Exp Psychol 58(1):17–22.
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
5. Roediger HL, McDermott KB (1995) Creating false memories: Remembering
words not presented in lists. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 21(4):803–814.
6. Roediger III HL, Balota DA, Watson JM (2001) Spreading activation and
arousal of false memories. The Nature of Remembering: Essays in Honor of
Robert G. Crowder, eds Roediger III HL, Nairne JS, Neath I, Surprenant AM
(APA, Washington, DC, US), pp 95–115.
7. Gallo DA (2010) False memories and fantastic beliefs: 15 years of the DRM
illusion. Mem Cognit 38(7):833–48.
8. Schacter DL, Verfaellie M, Pradere D (1996) The neuropsychology of memory
illusions: False recall and recognition in amnesic patients. J Mem Lang
35(2):319–334.
9. Cabeza R, Rao SM, Wagner AD, Mayer AR, Schacter DL (2001) Can medial
temporal lobe regions distinguish true from false? An event-related functional
MRI study of veridical and illusory recognition memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 98(8):4805–10.
10. McDermott KB, Watson JM, Ojemann JG (2005) Presurgical language mapping.
Curr Dir Psychol Sci 14(6):291–295.
11. Kim H, Cabeza R (2007) Differential contributions of prefrontal, medial
temporal, and sensory-perceptual regions to true and false memory
formation. Cereb Cortex 17(9):2143–50.
12. Boggio PS, et al. (2009) Temporal lobe cortical electrical stimulation during
the encoding and retrieval phase reduces false memories. PLoS One
4(3):e4959.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
13. Gallate J, Chi R, Ellwood S, Snyder A (2009) Reducing false memories by
magnetic pulse stimulation. Neurosci Lett 449(3):151–4.
14. Drowos DB, Berryhill M, André JM, Olson IR (2010) True memory, false
memory, and subjective recollection deficits after focal parietal lobe lesions.
Neuropsychology 24(4):465–475.
15. Atkins AS, Reuter-Lorenz PA (2011) Neural mechanisms of semantic
interference and false recognition in short-term memory. Neuroimage
56(3):1726–34.
16. Warren DE, Jones SH, Duff MC, Tranel D (2014) False recall is reduced by
damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex: Implications for understanding
the neural correlates of schematic memory. J Neurosci 34(22):7677–82.
17. Patterson K, Nestor PJ, Rogers TT (2007) Where do you know what you
know? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nat
Rev Neurosci 8(12):976–87.
18. McClelland JL, Rogers TT (2003) The parallel distributed processing approach
to semantic cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 4(4):310–22.
19. Skipper-Kallal LM, Mirman D, Olson IR (2015) Converging evidence from fMRI
and aphasia that the left temporoparietal cortex has an essential role in
representing abstract semantic knowledge. Cortex 69:104–120.
20. Wang J, Conder JA, Blitzer DN, Shinkareva S V. (2010) Neural representation
of abstract and concrete concepts: A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies.
Hum Brain Mapp 31(10):1459–1468.
21. Clarke A, Tyler LK (2015) Understanding What We See: How We Derive
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Meaning From Vision. Trends Cogn Sci 19(11):677–687.
22. Kriegeskorte N, Kievit RA (2013) Representational geometry: Integrating
cognition, computation, and the brain. Trends Cogn Sci 17(8):401–12.
23. Bruffaerts R, et al. (2013) Similarity of fMRI activity patterns in left perirhinal
cortex reflects semantic similarity between words. J Neurosci 33(47):18597–
607.
24. Devereux BJ, Clarke A, Marouchos A, Tyler LK (2013) Representational
Similarity Analysis Reveals Commonalities and Differences in the Semantic
Processing of Words and Objects. J Neurosci 33(48):18906–18916.
25. Carlson TA, Simmons RA, Kriegeskorte N, Slevc LR (2014) The emergence of
semantic meaning in the ventral temporal pathway. J Cogn Neurosci
26(1):120–31.
26. Stadler MA, Roediger HL, McDermott KB (1999) Norms for word lists that
create false memories. Mem Cognit 27(3):494–500.
27. Roediger HL, Watson JM, McDermott KB, Gallo DA (2001) Factors that
determine false recall: A multiple regression analysis. Psychon Bull Rev
8(3):385–407.
28. Kriegeskorte N, Goebel R, Bandettini P (2006) Information-based functional
brain mapping. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(10):3863–8.
29. Kriegeskorte N, Simmons WK, Bellgowan PSF, Baker CI (2009) Circular
analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nat Neurosci
12(5):535–40.
30. Charest I, Kievit RA, Schmitz TW, Deca D, Kriegeskorte N (2014) Unique
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
semantic space in the brain of each beholder predicts perceived similarity.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(40):14565–70.
31. van Kesteren MTR, Ruiter DJ, Fernández G, Henson RN (2012) How schema
and novelty augment memory formation. Trends Neurosci 35(4):211–9.
32. Mitchell TM, et al. (2008) Predicting human brain activity associated with the
meanings of nouns. Science 320(5880):1191–5.
33. Ramirez S, et al. (2013) Creating a false memory in the hippocampus. Science
341(6144):387–391.
34. Edelson M, Sharot T, Dolan RJ, Dudai Y (2011) Following the crowd: Brain
substrates of long-term memory conformity. Science 333(6038):108–11.
35. LaRocque KF, et al. (2013) Global similarity and pattern separation in the
human medial temporal lobe predict subsequent memory. J Neurosci
33(13):5466–74.
36. Davis T, Xue G, Love BC, Preston AR, Poldrack R a (2014) Global neural
pattern similarity as a common basis for categorization and recognition
memory. J Neurosci 34(22):7472–84.
37. Arndt J, Hirshman E (1998) True and false recognition in MINERVA2:
Explanations from a global matching perspective. J Mem Lang 39:371–391.
38. Chadwick MJ, Bonnici HM, Maguire EA (2014) CA3 size predicts the precision
of memory recall. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(29):10720–5.
39. Devlin JT, et al. (2000) Susceptibility-induced loss of signal: Comparing PET
and fMRI on a semantic task. Neuroimage 11(6 Pt 1):589–600.
40. Weiskopf N, Hutton C, Josephs O, Deichmann R (2006) Optimal EPI
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
parameters for reduction of susceptibility-induced BOLD sensitivity losses: a
whole-brain analysis at 3 T and 1.5 T. Neuroimage 33(2):493–504.
41. Weiskopf N, Hutton C, Josephs O, Turner R, Deichmann R (2007) Optimized
EPI for fMRI studies of the orbitofrontal cortex: Compensation of
susceptibility-induced gradients in the readout direction. MAGMA 20(1):39–
49.
42. Kay KN, Rokem A, Winawer J, Dougherty RF, Wandell BA (2013) GLMdenoise:
A fast, automated technique for denoising task-based fMRI data. Front
Neurosci 7:247.
43. Misaki M, Kim Y, Bandettini P a, Kriegeskorte N (2010) Comparison of
multivariate classifiers and response normalizations for pattern-information
fMRI. Neuroimage 53(1):103–18.
44. Chadwick MJ, Bonnici HM, Maguire EA (2012) Decoding information in the
human hippocampus: A user’s guide. Neuropsychologia 50(13):3107–21.
45. Björnsdotter M, Rylander K, Wessberg J (2011) A Monte Carlo method for
locally multivariate brain mapping. Neuroimage 56(2):508–16.
46. Nichols TE, Holmes AP (2002) Nonparametric permutation tests for
functional neuroimaging: A primer with examples. Hum Brain Mapp 15(1):1–
25.
47. Brysbaert M, New B (2009) Moving beyond Kucera and Francis: A critical
evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new
and improved word frequency measure for American English. Behav Res
Methods 41(4):977–90.
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
48. Yarkoni T, Balota D, Yap M (2008) Moving beyond Coltheart’s N: A new
measure of orthographic similarity. Psychon Bull Rev 15(5):971–979.
49. Xia M, Wang J, He Y (2013) BrainNet Viewer: a network visualization tool for
human brain connectomics. PLoS One 8(7):e68910.
50. Morey R (2008) Confidence intervals from normalized data: A correction to
Cousineau (2005). Tutor Quant Methods Psychol 4:61 – 64.
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
A
B
Fig. 1. Neural predictions arising from the DRM false memory illusion. (A) For three
DRM lists, we illustrate the semantic relatedness between presented list items on
the periphery, and the unseen related concept at the center. Beneath each, we show
the likelihood that this word list will produce a false memory for the related lure
concept. As semantic relatedness increases, so does the false memory likelihood. (B)
We hypothesize that the neural representation of DRM list items should overlap
with the neural representation of the related lure concept. The extent of overlap
should directly reflect the semantic relatedness and false memory likelihood of each
DRM lure concept. To assess neural overlap for a DRM list we measured the fMRI
voxel pattern similarity between the lure concept and the four related list items.
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
A B
d
o
o
h
eli
k
y
li
or
m
e
m
e
s
al
al
f
c
ni
o
n
a
C
Temporal pole neural overlap
Fig. 2. Neural overlap correlates with canonical false memory likelihood in the left
temporal pole (TP). (A) A whole-brain searchlight analysis revealed a significant
cluster in the left TP (peak MNI coordinates: -51, 17, -25; Pseudo-t = 5.33; cluster
extent = 92 voxels), with no other region displaying any significant information.
Results are displayed on a cortical surface map using BrainNet Viewer (49). (B) To
visualize the relationship between neural overlap and false memory, we plot the
group average neural overlap for each of the 40 DRM lists against canonical false
memory likelihood, using a cross-validation procedure over subjects to avoid
artificial inflation of the effect size. There is a clear positive correlation between the
two (r(39)=0.40, p=0.012), showing that the degree of semantic relatedness in the
neural data predicts variation in false memory strength across the DRM lists. This
correlation remains (r(39)=0.45, p=0.005), after removing two potential outliers.
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
A B
0.85
1.00
d
e o
p o
y h
e t 0.75 eli 0.75
o
n s
y
li k
e s
p
m
or
orti o n
of
e a
c h r
0
0
.
.
2
5
5
0 A H l i l g R h e C s o p n o f n id s e e n s ce
o
ni c al
f
al
s e
m e
0
0
.
.
5
6
5
5
Pr o p C a n
0.00
0.45
Hits False False 0.25 0.50 0.75
Alarms Memories Group false memory strength
Fig. 3. DRM recognition memory results. (A) Group mean hit rate, false alarm rate
and false memory rate are displayed for all responses regardless of confidence
(blue), and for high confidence responses (red). Error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals, adjusted for within-subject data (50). False Memory rates were
significantly greater than False Alarm rates (Z=3.72, p<0.001). This is clear evidence
for the expected false memory illusion, which is robust even for high confidence
responses (Z=3.72, p<0.001). (B) The group level false memory likelihood across the
40 DRM lists correlated positively (r(39)=0.48, p=0.0016) with canonical false
recognition rates, even after removing one potential outlier (r(39)=0.48, p=0.0018).
All plots are based on a sample size of 18.
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
A B
*
0.15
S3 . . . .
n
o
X ati
0.10
el
orr
X C
al
0.05
X X vi
or
h a 0.00
e
X X B
al-
ur −0.05
e
X X N
−0.10
Within Between
Subject Subject
Fig. 4. The temporal pole (TP) contains subject-specific neural information that
predicts false memories. (A) For each subject, we calculated the correlation between
their TP neural overlap, and their pattern of false memories. As a baseline, we
calculated the average between-subject correlation. This procedure is illustrated
schematically. By comparing the within-subject (red arrow) and average between-
subject (blue arrows) correlations we can determine whether there is any subject-
specific mapping between the neural and behavioral data. (B) The group average
within- and between-subject correlations are displayed for the false memory data.
Error bars display 95% confidence intervals on a one-way t-test, corrected for
within-subjects statistical testing (50). The plots are based on a sample size of 18.
36
