
--- PAGE 1 ---
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2009)364,1263–1271
doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0296
The construction system of the brain
Demis Hassabis* and Eleanor A. Maguire*
Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging,Institute of Neurology, University College London,
12 QueenSquare, London WC1N 3BG, UK
The ability to construct a hypothetical situation in one’s imagination prior to it actually occurring
mayaffordgreateraccuracyinpredictingitseventualoutcome.Therecollectionofpastexperiencesis
alsoconsideredtobeareconstructiveprocesswithmemoriesrecreatedfromtheircomponentparts.
Construction,therefore,playsacriticalroleinallowingustoplanfor thefutureandremember the
past. Conceptually, construction can be broken down into a number of constituent processes
althoughlittleisknownabouttheir neuralcorrelates.Moreover,ithasbeensuggestedthatsomeof
theseprocessesmaybesharedbyanumberofothercognitivefunctionsincludingspatialnavigation
and imagination. Recently, novel paradigms have been developed that allow for the isolation and
characterization of these underlying processes and their associated neuroanatomy. Here, we
selectively review this fast-growing literature and consider some implications for remembering the
past andpredicting the future.
Keywords:episodicmemory; imagination; hippocampus; autobiographical;
functional magnetic resonance imaging; episodicfuturethinking
1.INTRODUCTION Taking a different approach, several recent fMRI
The recollection of episodic memories is widely studies compared recall of autobiographical memories
accepted to be a reconstructive process as opposed to withpredictingpossiblepersonallyrelevantfutureevents
thesimpleretrievalofaperfectholisticrecord(Bartlett (known as episodic future thinking (EFT), Atance &
1932; Schacter et al. 1998, 2008; Conway & O’Neill 2001),and found near completeoverlap in the
Pleydell-Pearce 2000; Rubin et al. 2003; Hassabis & brain networks activated (Okuda et al. 2003; Szpunar
Maguire 2007). Recollection relies on a number et al. 2007; Botzung et al. 2008, but see Addis et al.
of component processes. These include a sense of 2007). In terms of characterizing the underlying
subjective time (Tulving 2002), connection to the self processes and their mapping to specific brain regions,
(Conway & Pleydell-Pearce 2000; Gallagher 2000), however, it is clear from these studies that only limited
narrative structure (Rubin et al. 2003), retrieval of further progress can be made by using EFT as a
relevant semantic information (Wheeler et al. 1997, comparison task because it engages all of the same
2000; Gottfried et al. 2004), feelings of familiarity processes as episodic memory and to a similar degree
(Wagneretal.2005)andrichmultimodalre-experien- (Suddendorf & Corballis 1997; Schacter et al. 2007).
cing of the event (Tulving 2002) in a coherent spatial Here, we suggest that in the context of real-world
context (Byrne et al. 2007; Hassabis & Maguire 2007; experiences,aproductivewaytoinvestigaterecollection
Hassabis et al. 2007b; Bird & Burgess 2008). From ofthepastandpredictionofthefutureis,ironically,not
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the past or the future at all. We argue that
becausethecoreprocessesunderlyingpredictionofthe
studies, we also know that a distributed and highly
future can be co-opted by a range of other atemporal
consistent network of brain regions supports memory
cognitivefunctions,theseprocessesmaybebestisolated
for past experiences. This comprises dorsal and
andunderstoodinthecontextofparadigmswheretime
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (PFC), lateral PFC,
is not an explicit factor, such as imagining fictitious
the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, lateral
experiences. We believe that time does not merit
temporalcortices,temporoparietaljunction,thalamus,
elevation to the level of an independent process with a
retrosplenial cortex (RSC), posterior cingulate cortex
distinct neural signature. Instead, we view the time-
(PCC), precuneus and cerebellum (Maguire 2001a;
stampofanevent(whetherfutureorpast)assimplythe
Maguire&Frith2003;Svobodaetal.2006;Cabeza&
resultofacontentorgoaldifferenceratherthanachange
St Jacques 2007; Hassabis et al. 2007a; figure 1).
in the fundamental processes involved (see Hassabis &
Despite over a decade of activating this network,
Maguire 2007). In order to test this idea, it has been
however, surprisingly little is understood about the
necessarytodevelopnovelexperimentalparadigms.
contributionsindividualbrainareasmaketotheoverall
recollective experience (Hassabis & Maguire2007).
2.USINGIMAGINATION
Recently, one important tool in the development of
*Authors for correspondence (d.hassabis@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk,
e.maguire@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk). noveltaskshasbeenimagination(Hassabis&Maguire
2007). In many ways, imagining new experiences can
Onecontributionof18toaThemeIssue‘Predictionsinthebrain:
usingourpasttoprepareforthefuture’. be regarded as the purest expression of construction.
1263 Thisjournalisq2009TheRoyalSociety

--- PAGE 2 ---
1264 D. Hassabis & E.A. Maguire The brain’sconstruction system
(a) (b)
(i) (i)
(ii) (ii)
(iii) (iii)
Figure 1. (a,b(i)–(iii)) The episodic memory network. Significant peaks of activity from a meta-analysis of 24 neuroimaging
studiesofautobiographicalmemory(Svobodaetal.2006).Theclassiccoreepisodicmemorynetworkcanbeseeninredand
includesthehippocampusbilaterally,parahippocampalgyrus,retrosplenial,posteriorcingulateandposteriorparietalcortices
andmedialPFC.Activationsincore(red),secondary(green)andinfrequentlyreportedregions(blue)aredepictedacrossright
andleft,lateral,medialandsubcorticalplanes.AdaptedfromSvobodaetal.(2006)withpermissionfromElsevier.
All healthy volunteers can effortlessly use their performances can be compared and contrasted more
imagination to a basic degree (indeed humans have directly than would be possible in a standard episodic
told stories and delighted in fiction and narrative for memoryrecall paradigm (Hassabis et al. 2007b).
thousands of years), and verbally induced imagination Crucially, tasks involving imagined scenarios can
of scenes has been shown to be possible and useful in be designed to de-emphasize key features allowing
the neuropsychological context (Bisiach & Luzzatti insightstobegainedintotheneuralsubstratesofthese
1978). Experiences constructed by the imagination, features when compared with episodic memories
while having much in common with episodic mem- (Hassabis et al. 2007a). For example, participants
ories,havetheadvantageofbeingeasiertosystematize canbeaskedtoconstructfictitiousexperiencesintheir
and experimentally manipulate (Hassabis & Maguire imagination that are atemporal (i.e. not set in the past
2007). For example, participants can be asked to orinthefuture)andwithalowconnectiontotheself.
construct the same fictitious situations, and their Figure 2a shows a description of one such imagined
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2009)

--- PAGE 3 ---
Thebrain’sconstruction system D. Hassabis &E.A.Maguire 1265
(a)
Cue: Imagine standing by a small stream somewhere deep in a forest
‘It's a pine forest. What I can see on the ground all around me are patches of pine
needles and brown earth with nothing really growing. The tree trunks are quite
narrow. Overhead are the spikes of the green pines and you can only just see the
sky. There's a pine needle smell but down towards the stream there's a slightly
rotting smell. It's quite a narrow stream with stones in it and dark water rushing round
them causing little white water eddies. There's not much life around the stream and
the banks are quite steep sloping down to the stream. It's peaceful and quiet...’
(b)
Time scale: 5 years in future; cue: dress
‘My sister will be finishing... her undergraduate education, I imagine some neat place,
Ivy League private school... it would be a very nice spring day and my mom and my
dad will be there, my dad with the camcorder as usual, and my mom with the camera
as usual. My sister will be in the crowd and they'd be calling everyone's name... I
can see her having a different hair style by then, maybe instead of straight, very curly
with lots of volume. She would be wearing contacts by then and heels of course. And
I can see myself sitting in some kind of sundress, like yellow, and under some trees...
the reception either before or after and it would be really nice summer food, like
salads and fruits, and maybe some sweets, and cold drinks that are chilled but have no
ice. And my sister would be sitting off with her friends, you know, talking with them
about graduating, and they'd probably get emotional.’
Figure2.Descriptionsofexperiences.Representativeexamplesofparticipanttranscriptswhencuedtodescribe(a)animagined
fictitiousexperience(datafromHassabisetal.2007a)and(b)apersonallyrelevantfutureexperience(datafromAddisetal.
2007).Notetheabsenceofexplicittemporalandself-relevantstatementsin(a)thatarecommonplacein(b)suchas‘Iwillbe’
and‘mysisteristhere’.
(i) (ii) (iii)
(a)
(ii)
(i)
(b)
(iii) (iv)
Figure 3. The imagination network. Brain regions active when recalling imagined fictitious experiences that were previously
createdinapre-scaninterviewincludedthehippocampus,parahippocampalgyrus,retrosplenialandposteriorparietalcortices
andmedialPFC.(a(i))Sagittal,(ii)coronaland(iii)axialimagesfroma‘glassbrain’,whichenablesonetoappreciateactivations
in all locations and levels in the brain simultaneously. (b) Activations on a selection of relevant (i) sagittal, (ii) coronal and
((iii),(iv)) axial sections from the averaged structural MRI scan of the 21 study participants at a threshold of p!0.001
uncorrected(datafromHassabisetal.2007a).
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2009)

--- PAGE 4 ---
1266 D. Hassabis & E.A. Maguire The brain’sconstruction system
experience (Hassabis et al. 2007a). It is interesting to between these two positions largely due to disparate
contrast this transcript with one from an fMRI study testing protocols, patient aetiologies and scoring
involving plans for a future personal experience (Addis systems (Levine et al. 2002; Moscovitch et al. 2005;
etal.2007;figure2b).Clearlytheimaginedscenarioisset Kirwan et al. 2008). It has been suggested that
in the present and in this case does not have the same discrepancies between studies of remote episodic
involvement with the imaginer’s self-schema as the memory in hippocampal-damaged patients (Bayley
personal future event (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce et al. 2003) might be accounted for by differences in
2000; Gallagher 2000) although both types of scenario the quality or richness of the recollective experience
involve the adoption of an egocentric viewpoint on the (Gilboa et al. 2004), a feature that is not always
part of the imaginer (Burgess 2006). Being able to captured by existing scoring systems (Kopelman et al.
manipulate factors such as the level of self-relevance/ 1989;Hassabis et al. 2007b).
involvementandthedegreeofoverlapbetweenmemories Consideringtheextantliteratureaboveandnowalso
and imagined experiences has the potential to progress thefindingsfromourimaginationstudy(Hassabisetal.
ourunderstandingofthecoreprocessesandbrainareas 2007b),wesuggestthatthehippocampusmayhavetwo
involved(Hassabis&Maguire2007). distinct functions in episodic memory recall. Further-
To this end, we designed a novel imagination task more, we propose that such a dual role may help to
that involved participants richly imagining new ficti- resolvethelong-standingdebateaboutthetimescaleof
tiousexperiences(Hassabisetal.2007b).Wereasoned hippocampal involvement in episodic memory. First,
that if episodic memory recall was truly a reconstruc- the hippocampus may be the initial location for the
tiveprocess(Bartlett1932;Schacteretal.1998),witha memory index (Marr 1971) which reinstantiates the
memory reassembled from its stored constituent active set of contextual details (Wheeler et al. 2000;
components, then some of these integrative processes Polyn et al. 2005; Polyn & Kahana 2008) and later
should also be co-opted by a purely constructive task mightbeconsolidatedoutofthehippocampus(Squire
involving imagination (Hassabis et al. 2007b). We et al. 2004). Second, the hippocampus may have
tested patients with primary damage to the hippo- another role as an online integrator supporting the
campusbilaterallyasthisstructureiswellknowntobe binding of these reactivated components into a
critical in supporting episodic memory (Scoville & coherent whole to facilitate the rich recollection of
Milner1957).Wefoundthat,aswellasbeingimpaired a past episodic memory, regardless of its age. Such a
atrecallingthepast,thepatientswerenotabletorichly function would be of great use also for predicting the
imagine new experiences. This was the case for EFT future, imaginationand navigation.
scenarios (see also Klein et al. 2002;Rosenbaum et al. Furtherempiricalevidencehintingatatwo-process
2005) and, crucially, for constructions that were function of the hippocampus comes from structural
atemporal and low in self-relevance. Even when all MRIstudiesofexpertnavigators(Londontaxidrivers)
the components necessary to construct a fictitious who show increased grey matter volume in posterior
experience were supplied in the form of visual hippocampusseeminglyattheexpenseofreducedgrey
elements, sounds and smells, patients’ performance mattervolumeinanteriorhippocampus(Maguireetal.
didnotimprove(Hassabisetal.2007b).Thesourceof 2006b). Moreover, their increased spatial knowledge
their deficit was an inability to integrate the imagined appears to come at a cost to the acquisition of new
experience into a coherent whole manifesting itself visual associative information (Maguire et al. 2006b;
most obviously in the discontinuity of the spatial Woollett&Maguire2009).Thehippocampusisideally
context. We concluded that the hippocampus plays a placed to support these two roles both in terms of the
critical role in imagination by binding together the diversity of its multisensory inputs and its specific
disparate elements of an event or scene (O’Keefe & anatomical properties (Andersen et al. 2007), such as
Nadel 1978;Cohen& Eichenbaum 1993). the high number of recurrent connections, although
Ifthehippocampusplaysacriticalintegrativerolein clearlymoreworkisrequiredtocategoricallyascertain
a constructive process such as imagination, it seems if the hippocampus is performing more than one
plausible that it might also have a similar role in function in episodic memoryrecall.
supporting the rich recollection of episodic memories
and in predicting the future (Hassabis et al. 2007b).
It has long been known that the hippocampus is 3.THE CONSTRUCTIONSYSTEM
required to initially encode the memoryof an ongoing The(re)constructiveprocess,althoughcriticallyreliant
event(Scoville&Milner1957).Thetraditionalviewof on the hippocampus, is not supported by it alone. We
memory posits that over time these memories are sought to characterize the entire construction network
consolidated to neocortex, which is then able to by using fMRI to compare imagination with episodic
support the recall of remote memories independently memory recall (Hassabis et al. 2007a). Healthy
fromthehippocampus(Squireetal.2004).Conversely, participantsengagedinthreetaskswhileinthescanner:
otheraccounts(Sanders&Warrington1971;Cipolotti (i) vivid recall of recent real memories, (ii) vivid recall
et al. 2001; Murray & Bussey 2001; Moscovitch et al. of previously created imaginary experiences, and
2005;Maguireetal.2006a),supportedbytheresultsof (iii) construction of new imaginary experiences for
the majority of fMRI studies on episodic memory the first time in the scanner. Recall of recent auto-
(Maguire2001a;Svobodaetal.2006),havesuggested biographical memories activated the now classic
that the hippocampus is always required for rich network shown in figure 1 (Maguire 2001a; Svoboda
episodic memory recall irrespective of memory age. et al. 2006). Interestingly, imagined experiences were
Various patient studies have been unable to arbitrate associated with increased activity in manyof the same
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2009)

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thebrain’sconstruction system D. Hassabis &E.A.Maguire 1267
brain areas (figure 3). A conjunction analysis was crashing on the shore or the face of your best friend,
performed in order to examine the brain regions andpotentiallylearnedoverandsharedacrossmultiple
activated in common by the three conditions. episodicmemories.
A distributed brain network was implicated involving Alternatives to scene construction have been pro-
the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, RSC, posed (Buckner & Carroll 2007; Schacter & Addis
posterior parietal cortices, middle temporal cortices 2007;Schacteretal.2008).Similar tosceneconstruc-
and ventromedial PFC (figure 4). This construction tion,theprocessof‘self-projection’(Buckner&Carroll
network cannot only account for a large part of the 2007) defined as ‘the shifting of the self to alternative
episodic memory recall network (figure 1) and EFT perspectives in time or space’ has been posited as an
(Addis et al. 2007; Szpunar et al. 2007; Botzung et al. underlying process common to a set of disparate
2008), but also bears a striking resemblance to cognitive functions including episodic memory recall,
networks activated by navigation (Maguire 2001b; EFTand navigation. However, while self-projection is
Burgess et al. 2002), spatial (Maguire et al. 2003; clearly an important concept, it conflates several
Kumaran&Maguire2005)andplacetasks(Epstein& distinct component processes including scene con-
Kanwisher 1998; Sugiura et al. 2005), aswellas those struction (Hassabis & Maguire 2007) and theory of
associated with mind wandering (Mason et al. 2007) mind (Amodio & Frith 2006). For the purposes of
and the default network (Raichle et al. 2001; Buckner teasing apart the various component processes under-
et al. 2008). This suggests there may be a set of key pinningepisodicmemorywesuggestitisadvantageous
component processes underlying all of these cognitive toconsider constituent processesin asreduced aform
functions (Buckner & Carroll 2007; Hassabis & aspossible.Thus,webelievetheconstructionnetwork
Maguire 2007;Sprengetal. in press). is most accurately characterized as being invoked
Wehavesuggestedthatthesecommonprocessescan whenever attention is directed away from the current
be characterized by the concept of scene construction externalsituationandinsteadfocusedinwardstowards
(Hassabis & Maguire 2007). Scene or event construc- a rich internal representation of an event, real or
tioninvolvesthementalgenerationandmaintenanceof imagined. Processes such as theory of mind are only
a complex and coherent scene or event. This is engagedifrequired,i.e.inthecase ofEFTorepisodic
achieved by the reactivation, retrieval and integration memory recall but not necessarily in imagination or
of relevant semantic, contextual and sensory com- navigation. This may explain why the construction
ponents,storedintheirmodalityspecificcorticalareas network has a similar pattern of activity to that
(Wheeler et al. 2000), the product of which has a associated with the default network (Raichle et al.
coherent spatial context (Hassabis et al. 2007b), and 2001; Buckner et al. 2008) and mind wandering
can then later be manipulated and visualized. In fact, (Mason et al. 2007), cognitive functions that involve
scene construction is a specific example of ‘associative minimal external stimuli combined with introspection
construction’, which involves visual imagery, binding andrichinternalimagery.Theseconstructedscenesor
and also disparate multimodal elements that, when events, created and maintained by the construction
bound together, (re)create an event as a whole. This network, can then be manipulated further by other
includescontextualdetailssuchassoundsandsmellsin processes, such as theory of mind, to allow shifting of
addition to visual inputs, people, objects, entities and theselftoalternativeperspectivesinspaceorsubjective
their actions. time (Buckner & Carroll2007;Arzyet al.2008).
Scene construction differs markedly from ‘simple’
visual imagery such as that for single objects (Kosslyn
et al. 2001), in that it requires the flexible association 4.ADD-ONS TOTHE CONSTRUCTIONSYSTEM
and integration of many scene elements. Our fMRI We have demonstrated that scene construction is a
studyalsoincludedtasksrequiringvividvisualizationof dissociable set of processes supporting the episodic
acontextual single objects as a baseline task (Hassabis memory system (Hassabis et al. 2007a), both past
et al. 2007a). Recalling previously seen or previously and future, but what are some of the other processes
imaginedobjects,orimaginingobjectsforthefirsttime that together with the construction system underpin
in the scanner resulted in activation of brain areas the special properties of episodic memory? We
associated with supporting object representations and addressed this question using our fMRI imagination
manipulations, namely lateral occipital complex and paradigm by contrasting the recall of real memoriesto
intraparietal sulcus (e.g. Sugiura et al. 2005;figure 5). the recall of previously created imaginary memories
Moreover, there was no overlap between this simple matched for difficulty, age, detail and vividness, thus
object network (Sugiura et al. 2005) and that of partialling out the effects of the common construction
complex scene construction (Hassabis et al. 2007a), network (Hassabis et al. 2007a). Three distinct areas
suggesting that they represent dissociable cognitive were more active for real compared to imaginary
processes with distinct neural bases. Nevertheless, memories, the anterior medial PFC, PCC and the
complexscenesandexperiencesareclearlyconstructed precuneus(figure 6).
outofsimplerelements.Ithasbeensuggestedthatpast The precuneus has been implicated in studies of
and future experiences draw on information stored in recognitionmemorywithincreasedactivityinresponse
episodic memory (Schacter et al. 2007, 2008). tofamiliaritems(Ruggetal.2002;Wagneretal.2005;
However, we argue that the component elements of Hornbergeretal.2006;Vincentetal.2006).Therefore,
constructions are not simply fragments of past events, the increased precuneus activity here probably reflects
but can comprise elements that are more abstracted the relatively greater familiarity of the visualized
and semantic such as the sound of ocean waves experience for real memories over more novel
Phil.Trans.R.Soc.B(2009)

--- PAGE 6 ---
(i) (ii) (iii)
(a)
(i) (ii)
(b)
Figure5.(a(i)–(iii))Neuralcorrelatesofrecallingsingleobjects.Thesearethebrainareasactivatedmoreforrecalling(realor
imagined)singleobjectsthanforcomplexexperiences,andincludethelateraloccipitalcomplexbilaterally,intraparietalsulcus
bilaterallyandrightlateralPFC.Viewsofthesebrainregionsarealsoshownin(b)onan(i)axialand(ii)coronalsectionsfrom
theaveragedstructuralMRIscanofthe21subjects,atathresholdofp!0.001uncorrected(datafromHassabisetal.2007a).
imaginary memories, given that we controlled for (Johnsonetal. 2002) and theoryofmind(Kumaran &
vividness. Activation in anterior medial PFC and Maguire 2005; Amodio & Frith 2006) suggesting that
PCC is consistent with studies of self-reflection these two regions support processes related to the self.
